MSC2545: Image Packs (Emoticons & Stickers) (#2545)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/2545-emotes.md

# MSC2545: Emotes

Emotes.....emotes!

# Proposal
Emotes have at least a shortcode and an mxc uri. They are sent as `<img>` tags currently already in
the spec, as such existing clients *should* be able to render them (support for this is sadly poor,
even within riot flavours). Such an `<img>` tag of a shortcode `:emote:` and an mxc uri `mxc://example.org/emote`
could look as follows:

```html
<img src="mxc://example.org/emote" alt=":emote:" title=":emote:" height="32" />
```

Both the `alt` and the `title` attributes are specified as they serve different purposes: `alt` is
displayed if e.g. the emote does not load. `title` is displayed e.g. on mouse hover over the emote.
The height is just a height that looks good on most devices with the normal, default font size.
No width is displayed as to not weirdly squish non-square emotes.

## Emote sources
In order to be able to send emotes the client needs to have a list of shortcodes and their corresponding
mxc uris. For this there are two different emote sources:

### User emotes
User emotes are per-user emotes that are defined in the users respective account data. The type for that

> is `im.ponies.user_emotes` (`m.emotes`). The content is as following:

Author: for now it is `im.ponies.user_emotes`, but once this is more finalized to actually be merged it'll be `m.emotes`

> # MSC2545: Emotes

Reviewer: @ellietheoracle @Sorunome I'm going to request that the emote pack UUID/versioning discussion continue here in this thread so we don't spam the discussion overview.

As for my own take on it, I think it may be over-complicating things. If I understand correctly, it could be used to solve two problems: deduplicating packs across rooms, and automatically dealing with different versions of a pack across different rooms, where one may be improved and marked with a high version number.

For the second problem, I believe this could spiral into a lot of edge cases, including specifying version semantics, so it should probably be best left to a separate MSC, or otherwise just putting the burden on the user to choose between packs - which, as they are relatively easy to compare, doesn't sound like a particularly bad solution.

As for de-duplication, let's consider the use-case where the user is in two rooms, who each have the same emote pack, and don't want to see two emotes when they search for `coolemote`.

Being able to set which emotes you would like to see globally partially solves this by allowing only one emote pack to show globally. So when you're in other rooms, you won't see two sets of the same emotes. But what about when you're chatting in the room with that pack that you've chosen not to show globally?

Now you will see both the global emote pack, and the one for the current room - meaning duplicated emotes again.

UUIDs could solve this problem, but indeed we can't currently decide which pack is better, and thus to show. To solve this problem, we *could* add an option to disable an emote pack for a room. However, I'm not entirely convinced that this solves all edge cases here, or that it should be a problem that we try to solve in this MSC.

If all of this becomes an epic, then I say it's best to leave out and fix separately.

Reviewer 2: it still seems like most of the conflicts here would be resolved by an incremental version tag, just use the newest one, and only prompt the user when two packs with the same version number have different emotes, which should in theory only occur if a client fails to bump the version number up by one, or if someone modifies the json of a pack without incrementing the number, or if two packs get out of sync in seperate rooms- which is a conflict that i hadn't thought of before just now and honestly have no idea how to resolve that, and it makes the whole UUID thing seem sort of pointless unless the emote packs were tracked by the  server itself which only adds more complexity, so basically i think i just made my own idea seem pointless .

Reviewer 2: i think a much more reasonable solution would be to just give the users the power to for example, disable all the emotes in a room except two that only that room has, or maybe a filter to disable duplicate emote names, and also an option to copy an emote shortcode and import it to a room or to the users account, seem like more practical solutions

Reviewer 2: at some point if there were deeper integration into synapse, a versioning system could be implemented, and packed without a UUID and a version number could be considered "legacy packs" and older packs would be given the oppurtunity to be upgraded, and merged .

Author: The deduplication accross rooms could be solved by deduplicating by mxc uri, prefering the one of the local room. If you sync emote bots accross rooms you are likely doing that with a bot and thus they all have the same mxc uri.

Reviewer 2: that's more sensible than by name, i agree on that, for priority of the tag chose to represent an mxc uri would be user, then added room packs, then local room though, as that would be what the user would be most familiar with .

Author: Added deduplication by mxc URI. This should be sufficient?

Author: resolving this conversation as it has this deduping and stuff

> # MSC2545: Emotes

Reviewer 3: Sorry if this has already been mentioned, I haven't been following the discussion here very closely.
Heads up that an "emote" is already a thing in the Matrix spec and refers to the messages with the `m.emote` msgtype: https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/latest#m-emote
It'd be nice to avoid a name clash with this feature; maybe by renaming this MSC into "custom emojis" (which is how Slack names it) or something similar?

Reviewer: Indeed, an "emote" in messaging apps is colloquially attributed to actions: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emote

Author: That is very inaccurate, though. "Emoji" only refers to the emotes in unicode, *not* to custom ones.

Reviewer: For one to have a "custom" something, you must still have an original something, and in this case it's called emoji?

Author: it's like saying that some random car is a "custom ferrari", which is inaccurate

Reviewer 3: I'm not saying I have a perfect name for it, it was a suggestion. My point is that "emote" doesn't fit with what the feature does _and_ clashes with an existing feature in the spec.

Reviewer 4: Why not prepend "Custom" without chancing Emote > Emoji?

Reviewer 3: > "Emoji" only refers to the emotes in unicode, not to custom one

That's the point of "custom" though, isn't it? Standard emojis are the emojis in the unicode spec, custom emojis are the emojis outside of the unicode spec.

Reviewer 3: > Why not prepend "Custom" without changing Emote > Emoji?

The issue then is that this feature isn't a custom version of emotes (as defined in Matrix and most messaging apps I know of). As I explained and anoa outlined, an emote generally refers to a `/me` action, not an emoji/image.

Reviewer 4: Oh, sorry! I thought this was mainly about this name being taken in the event namespace, I didn't know off the top of my head that `m.emote` was for `/me` messages.

Author: The core problem  here is that "emote" can refer to multiple things, `/me` messages and, well, custom emote image thingies. And both are valid.

Reviewer 3: > The core problem here is that "emote" can refer to multiple things, `/me` messages and, well, custom emote image thingies. And both are valid.

FWIW I don't personally recall ever seeing "emote" being used to refer to a custom image, only "emoticon" or "custom emoji" (the latter seeming to be the industry standard).

Reviewer: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1342360/90629607-94651880-e217-11ea-836e-cb990a8aeeee.png)

For a random ecosystem data point, Discord just calls them "Emoji".

Reviewer 3: > For a random ecosystem data point, Discord just calls them "Emoji".

To add more data/context, Slack and Mattermost call them "Custom emoji".

Author: Other platforms calling it emoji doesn't mean it is right xP Discord even calls their guilds "server" which is  very confusing.

Emote is short for Emoticon, in this case.

Reviewer 3: > Emote is short for Emoticon, in this case.

Afaik, `emot'` is, but `emote` is afaik generally known for `/me` actions.

Reviewer 3: > Other platforms calling it emoji doesn't mean it is right xP

No, but in this case it's not technically wrong (apart from discord calling them just "emoji" but imo it's still pretty close to the real thing) and following this industry standard would help less technical users understanding the feature and not get confused by what it's about.

Author: > > Emote is short for Emoticon, in this case.
> 
> ime, `emot'` is (to make it clear you're referring to an emoticon, not an emote), but `emote` is afaik generally known for `/me` actions.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emoticon

> An emoticon [...] short for "emotion icon", also known simply as an emote, [...]

Author: > > Other platforms calling it emoji doesn't mean it is right xP
> 
> No, but in this case it's not technically wrong (apart from discord calling them just "emoji" but imo it's still pretty close to the real thing) and following this industry standard would help less technical users understanding the feature and not get confused by what it's about.

So calling any car a "custom ferrari" is also not wrong, then? As that would be the analogy here...

Reviewer 3: > > > Other platforms calling it emoji doesn't mean it is right xP
> > 
> > 
> > No, but in this case it's not technically wrong (apart from discord calling them just "emoji" but imo it's still pretty close to the real thing) and following this industry standard would help less technical users understanding the feature and not get confused by what it's about.
> 
> So calling any car a "custom ferrari" is also not wrong, then? As that would be the analogy here...

This analogy doesn't work, but that's because "ferrari" is a subset of "cars" whereas "custom emoji" is a subset of "emoji" (so the other way around). I would consider a ferrari a car of a specific kind (just like I'd consider a custom emoji as an emoji of a specific kind), and a non-standard ferrari (i.e. if I added stuff to it that isn't included in the standard spec) a custom ferrari (and consider "custom ferrari" to be a subset of "ferrari"), yes.

Author: > This analogy doesn't work, but that's because "ferrari" is a subset of "cars" whereas "custom emoji" is a subset of "emoji" (so the other way around).

This is incorrect. "emoji" is a subset of "emoticon". "custom emoji" would e.g. be your own custom emoji font on how to represent emoji.

Author: How about `m.emoticons`?

Reviewer 3: > How about `m.emoticons`?

Yeah I think that'd work :)

Reviewer 5: yeah to me custom emoji would be defining emoji in PUA, not inline images.

Author: Done!

Emotes.....emotes!

# Proposal
Emotes have at least a shortcode and an mxc uri. They are sent as `<img>` tags currently already in
the spec, as such existing clients *should* be able to render them (support for this is sadly poor,
even within riot flavours). To allow clients to distinguish emotes from other inline images, a new

> property `data-mx-emote` is introduced. A client may chose to ignore the size attributes of emotes

Reviewer 6: How should a `data-mx-emote` attribute with a value be interpreted? If a value would have no significance, should a `class` be used instead?

Author: This is dependent on the client. A client may chose to ignore it, a client may chose to add a class. A client may chose to do something completely different. This is there to signal the client "Hey, this is an emote!"

Current things in the spec seem to work by adding `data-mx` properties, such as `data-mx-color` and `data-mx-bg-color` and `data-mx-spoiler`, so this seems to be in-line with that.

Reviewer 6: We already have `code` using `class`, although I wonder if that's just a historical accident and the spec team would prefer to not have more `class`.

Author: `code` using `class` is probably done because that seems to be pretty standard outside of matrix with highlight.js

# MSC2545: Emoticons

> Emoticons, or short emotes...we need them!

Reviewer 7: I'm having problems parsing this MSC due to lack of definitions.  Matrix already uses 'emote' to refer to the msgtype for an IRC-style /me action.  Emoticons however are *textual* representations of smilies etc - e.g. :), :S, or possibly (◕‿◕) for kaomoji.

It seems like this proposal is for custom emoji (i.e. inline images?)  So I'm really confused on why it seems to flip between talking about Emotes (the current PR name) and Emoticons (the h1 header) interchangeably... when it's actually talking about custom emoji?  I think?

I'm lost :/

Reviewer 8: Seems like a duplicate of https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2545#discussion_r472266607

Author: `m.emote` is for emotion - and it has been incorrectly named that way. `m.action` would have been more appropriate, as you use it to describe *actions*, not *emotions*. E.g. "/me is walking to the gym", or "/me is happy" and NOT "/me happy".

That, however, is *not* what this MSC is about. Instead, it is about Emoticons, which, well, can also be abbreviated as emotes.

Emoticons are just little images or text describing emotions or other things. Emojis are a subset of emoticons, namely those found within unicode. Custom emoji here would actually refer to a custom emoji font, your own rendering of 🦊, 🐱, etc., *not* new images. That is what custom emoticons, or custom emotes, are for.

Author: Also, emoticons are not only textual representations, as seen by the naming of the respective [unicode block](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emoticons_(Unicode_block))

Reviewer 9: perhaps the title of the PR should be edited to match the title of the proposal?

Author: Done!

Author: also added a paragraph on emoji and `m.emote` as it came up a few times.

# MSC2545: Emoticons

Emoticons, or short emotes...we need them!

## Terminology
Since there is a lot of confusion of how this relates to `m.emote`, why this isn't called custom emoji
etc, there it is:

> `m.emtoe` is for emotion - and it has been incorrectly named this way. `m.action` would have been more

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
`m.emote` is for emotion - and it has been incorrectly named this way. `m.action` would have been more
```

appropriate, as you use it to describe *actions*, not *emotions*. E.g. "/me is walking to the gym", or
"/me is happy" and *not* "/me happy".

That, however, is *not* what this MSC is about. Instead it is about emoticons, also known in short as
emotes.

Emoticons are just little images or text describing emotions or other things. Emoji are a subset of
emoticons, namely those found within unicode. Custom emoji here would actually refer to a custom emoji
font, that is your own rendering of 🦊, 🐱, etc., *not* new images. New images is what custom emoticons

> are for.

Author: The spec should name things accurately for what they are. Clients can name things in the UI however they like - we already have a discrepancy of groups vs communities in element, for example.

> are for.

Reviewer 11: I don't see this as the same thing. Developers and end users alike are most likely to call these emoji whether we like it or not. We already tried to call something by its formal technical name (relationships) and ultimately had to settle for putting "rich replies" into the spec verbatim because no one was going to call it a relationship.

> are for.

Author: Yet the key is called `m.relates_to`. Soru was talking about the *key* name, for the actual API

There was actually already a lengthy discussion about this on this MSC, here (please note that soru still called it `m.emote` back then, to make it easier to read that conversation): https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2545#discussion_r472266607

> are for.

Reviewer 11: I'd honestly advocate that we just give in and call it emoji across the board.

> are for.

Author: (just so you know, soru does not currently plan on changing this. Multiple people in here have expressed "emoticon" being a good name, and she'd love to hear more opinions from others.)

> are for.

Reviewer 12: My 2c. To the protocol Unicode Emoji and Image Emoticons are quite distinct so I think it will be less confusing to implementors if we keep the terms separate and try to be precise with which one we are talking about when. 

However I agree that for user facing documentation, UX and even feature names I think that it will make sense to just call them all emoji.

> are for.

Reviewer 8: i imagine developers would understand the difference between unicode characters and images, it doesn't make sense to call them emoji, it would honestly be more confusing .z

> are for.

Author: Since the only place that `emoticon` appears anymore is in the `usage`, can this thread be considered resolved?

> are for.

Reviewer: It looks to also appear in `data-mx-emoticon`.

Now, a client may chose to name these however they like, we already have a naming disparity between
spec and clients with groups vs communities. It is, however, imperative to name things in the spec
accurately after what they are.

> ## Proposal

Author: Why? Different formats make sense in different situations. There are also gif emotes, webp, etc.

> ## Proposal

Reviewer 11: sure, but without a standard then this MSC has no guiding light. There's no reason to not suggest some recommended formats and sizes.

> ## Proposal

Author: Same argument for the HTML subset, then. What is the point of defining it in the spec if it is just a suggestion?

> ## Proposal

Author: There is also no suggestion as to what type is allowed for `m.image` or `m.sticker`. Emotes are basically mini-versions of those, so all those formats should also apply to emotes?

> ## Proposal

Reviewer 11: That's because of a historical failure to do so. There's now an MSC to fix that, and this MSC should not repeat the failures of the past.

> ## Proposal

Author: Alright, so png, gif, jpg, webm and svg all seem valid for now.

> ## Proposal

Author: Will also add recommended sizes.

Emoticons have at least a shortcode and an mxc uri. They are sent as `<img>` tags currently already in
the spec, as such existing clients *should* be able to render them (support for this is sadly poor,

> even within riot flavours). To allow clients to distinguish emoticons from other inline images, a new

Author: Towards the end of the MSC is a list of clients that support rendering `<img>` and those that already implement this MSC.

Or do you mean using `data-mx-emoticon` specifically? That would be only revolution and fluffychat, which wasn't added in either until about a week, which is why it is not mentioned in here yet.

> even within riot flavours). To allow clients to distinguish emoticons from other inline images, a new

Reviewer 11: I more mean that the bit in brackets isn't needed - it just makes the reader feel like this is going to turn out to be an attack on clients rather than an MSC.

Possible alternative wording would be:
> ... as such existing clients should already be able to render them, though not all clients currently handle `img` tags.

property `data-mx-emoticon` is introduced. A client may chose to ignore the size attributes of emoticons
when rendering, and instead pick the size based on other circumstances. This could e.g. be used to
display emoticons in messages with only emoticons and emoji larger than usual, which is commonly found in
messengers. Such an `<img>` tag of a shortcode `:emote:` and an mxc uri `mxc://example.org/emote`
could look as follows:

```html

> <img data-mx-emoticon src="mxc://example.org/emote" alt=":emote:" title=":emote:" height="32" />

Reviewer 11: Validation is important to us (as indicated on other MSCs): what if `data-mx-emoticon` has a value? what if the `src` is an `http`, `ftp`, or `mailto` scheme when the emoticon attribute is present?

```

Both the `alt` and the `title` attributes are specified as they serve different purposes: `alt` is
displayed if e.g. the emote does not load. `title` is displayed e.g. on mouse hover over the emote.
The height is just a height that looks good on most devices with the normal, default font size.
No width is displayed as to not weirdly squish non-square emotes.

### Emoticon sources
In order to be able to send emotes the client needs to have a list of shortcodes and their corresponding

> mxc uris. All the emote sources described here are merely suggestions on where to get emotes from.

Reviewer 11: > In order to be able to send emotes the client needs to have a list of shortcodes and their corresponding
mxc uris.

technically no they don't - it's more valuable to say that clients should be getting the graphics from the same place rather than rely on the client having to support features.

> All the emote sources described here are merely suggestions on where to get emotes from.

This makes me sad because it means that the sources to follow (whatever they are - I haven't read them while writing this yet) are unlikely to land in the spec. If they are merely suggestions then this means implementations can choose to do whatever they want, which makes the MSC a bit pointless. I suspect this is not what is intended though, so I would suggest rewording this to indicate that this is the baseline sharing mechanism for how these things work.

Author: > This makes me sad because it means that the sources to follow (whatever they are - I haven't read them while writing this yet) are unlikely to land in the spec.

The HTML subset for clients is merely a suggestion, and it is still in the spec. Soru does not see why it being a suggestion would prevent it form landing in the spec, especially since such things are there already.

Reviewer 11: It's the phrasing that is different - it's perfectly valid to land suggestions in the spec, it just has to sound like a suggestion. This ties back into the "firm and direct" things I mentioned in the overarching review comment: the proposal sounds like it's unsure about what it wants to propose when in fact it should be saying something more direct.

A client is free to implement / design their own way of fetching emotes, e.g. via dropping image files
into a folder and uploading them on-the-fly. For cross-compatibility between clients it'd still be a
good idea to implement the emote sources described here. For this there are two different emote sources:

#### User emoticons

> User emotes are per-user emotes that are defined in the users respective account data. The type for that

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
User emotes are per-user emotes that are defined in the user's respective account data. The type for that
```

> is `im.ponies.user_emotes` (later: `m.emoticons`). The content is as following:

Reviewer 11: The unstable prefix section at the bottom covers event types - the proposal should never use unstable prefixes in the actual proposal parts.

```suggestion
is `m.emoticons`, the `content` of which is as follows:
```

Author: how about `m.emoticons` (unstable prefix: `im.ponies.user_emotes`)

The problem soru faced is that both `im.ponies.user_emotes` and `im.ponies.room_emotes` is to be mapped to `m.emoticons`, thus she can't just define unstable prefixes at the bottom.

Reviewer 11: The unstable prefixes section is often a table of mapped values. Putting them in the middle of the MSC makes it incredibly hard to read.

Author: Sorus point is - you can't map the values.

if you put

Unstable prefix:
`m.emoticons` is `im.ponies.user_emotes` and `m.emoticons` is `im.ponies.room_emotes` noone will know when to use which unstable prefix.

Reviewer 11: The section would look something like this:

> ### Unstable prefix
> For `m.emoticons` in the user's account data, use `im.ponies.user_emotes`. For `m.emoticons` in room state, use `im.ponies.room_emotes`.

It's a bit questionable to do that though - I'd probably recommend just making it consistent and accepting that existing implementations will have to change their ways slightly.

```json
{
  "emoticons": {
    ":emote": {
      "url": "mxc://example.org/blah"
    },
    ":other-emote:": {
      "url": "mxc://example.org/other-blah"
    }
  }
}
```

The emotes are defined inside of a dict called `emoticons`. The key is the shortcode of the emoticon.
The value is an object with `url` containing the mxc url of the emote. This is so that it is easier

> for clients or future MSCs to define custom metadata to emotes directly.

Reviewer 11: what if its an array? what is a required field? what are valid values for each of them?

Some existing implementations using `im.ponies.user_emotes` currently use a dict called `short` which

> is just a map of the shortcode to the mxc url.

Reviewer 11: Not relevant to the proposal - please remove or incorporate properly.

#### Room emoticons

> Room emotes are per-room emotes that every user of a specific room can use inside of that room. They

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
Room emotes are per-room emotes that every user of a specific room can only use inside of that room. They
```

> are set with a state event of type `im.ponies.room_emotes` (later: `m.emoticons`). The state key denotes a possible

Reviewer 11: again with the event types

pack, whereas the default one would be a blank state key. E.g. a discord bridge could set as state key
`de.sorunome.mx-puppet-bridge.discord` and have all the bridged emotes in said state event, keeping

> bridged emotes from matrix emotes separate.

Reviewer 11: the state key semantics are unclear here - what is a "pack"? is it an opaque ID?

The content extends that of the user emotes: It uses the `emoticons` key, which is a map of the shortcode
of the emote to an object containing its mxc url. Additionally, an optional `pack` key can be set,
which defines meta-information on the pack. The following keys for `pack` are valid:

>  - `displayname`: An easy displayname for the pack. Defaults to the room name, if it doesn't exist

Reviewer 11: let's fix this awful convention now:
```suggestion
 - `display_name`: An easy display name for the pack. Defaults to the room name, if it doesn't exist
```

Author: In `m.room.member` it is called `displayname`, soru wanted to stay consistent with existing events.

Reviewer 11: yea, normally I would agree but I'm a bit tired of seeing it propagate through Matrix, personally :p

Reviewer 13: sadly we have an almost equal mix of the two. I think we've previously agreed to prefer `display_name`. (we should probably update https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/blob/master/meta/documentation_style.rst#general)

>  - `displayname`: An easy displayname for the pack. Defaults to the room name, if it doesn't exist

Reviewer 11: what if it's not a string, or invalid, or present but empty?

>  - `displayname`: An easy displayname for the pack. Defaults to the room name, if it doesn't exist

Reviewer 11: can packs have the same name over multiples of them?

>  - `avatar_url`: The mxc uri of an avatar/icon to display for the pack. Defaults to the room name,
>    if it doesn't exist.

Reviewer 11: I assume you mean this:
```suggestion
 - `avatar_url`: The mxc uri of an avatar/icon to display for the pack. Defaults to the room avatar,
   if it doesn't exist.
```

it does still raise a question about what happens if it's an invalid type, empty, or the room doesn't have one.

 - `name`: A short identifier of the pack. Defaults to the normalized state key, and if the state

>    key is blank it defaults to "room".

Reviewer 11: can we call this an ID? Do we need it if it's just a version of the state key?

Author: The state key could e.g. in the case of a bridge be the bridge-bot's mxid to make sure the bridged emotes do not clash. As `name` can be used for suggestions, it might make sense to have as state key `@_discord_bot:yourserver.com` and as name `discord_awesome_guild` (for a guild named "Awesome Guild")

Reviewer 11: I don't really see what the value of a display name and a name are.

Author: State Key: machine-readable thing to make the pack unique, e.g. a uuid or the mxid of a bridge bot
Display Name: Nice name, e.g. `[Discord] Awesome Guild`
Name: short description, used for the typing syntax stated further down, e.g. `discord_awesome_guild`, and, when typing an emote, `:discord_awesome_guild~someemote:`

Reviewer 11: that description should be `shortcode_prefix` or `description` then - two names makes no sense.

   Normalized means here, converting spaces to `-`, taking only alphanumerical characters, `-` and `_`,
   and casting it all to lowercase. In regex, this would be `[a-z0-9-_]+`.

As such, a `im.ponies.room_emotes` (later: `m.emoticons`) state event could look like the following:

```json
{
  "emoticons": {
    ":emote:": {
      "url": "mxc://example.org/blah"
    },
    ":other-emote:": {
      "url": "mxc://example.org/other-blah"
    }
  },
  "pack": {
    "displayname": "Emotes from Discord!",
    "avatar_url": "mxc://example.org/discord_guild",
    "name": "some_discord_guild"
  }
}
```

Similarly as before, there are already existing implementations using `short` which is a map of shortcode

> to mxc url.

Reviewer 11: remove or incorporate please - it's not relevant to the MSC as an idea

#### Emoticon rooms
While room emotes are specific to a room and are only accessible within that room, emote rooms should
be accessible from everywhere. They do not differentiate themselves from room emotes at all, instead you
set an event in your account data of type `im.ponies.emote_rooms` (later: `m.emoticons.rooms`) which outlines

> which room emote states should be globally accessible for that user. For that, a `room` key contains

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
which room emote states are globally accessible for that user. For that, a `room` key contains
```

a map of room ids that map to state keys that map to an optional pack definition override.
The the contents of `im.ponies.emote_rooms` (later: `m.emoticons.rooms`) could look like the following:

```json
{
  "rooms": {
    "!someroom:example.org": {
      "": {},
      "de.sorunome.mx-puppet-bridge.discord": {
        "displayname": "Overriden name",

>         "short": "new_short_name"

Reviewer 11: I don't think we need these two bits of metadata here.

Author: They are local overrides, in case a user wants the emote pack to display differently for themself.

Author: removed this override now as it didn't make much sense

      }
    },
    "!someotherroom:example.org": {
      "": {}
    }
  }
}
```

Here three emote packs are globally accessible to the user: Two defined in `!someroom:example.org`
(one with blank state key and one with state key `de.sorunome.mx-puppet-bridge.discord`) and one in
`!someotherroom:example.org`.

### Emoticon source priority and deduplicating
When giving emoticon suggestions, clients are expected to deduplicate emotes by their mxc url. This
not only ensures that, when viewing a room that you also have in `m.emoticons.rooms`, it won't be
displayed twice, but also if you have e.g. a bot which syncs emotes over multiple rooms, those will
also be deduplicated.

Lastly, in order to have consistent and expected ordering of emotes when suggesting, they should be
suggested in the following order:
1. User emoticons (emotes set to your own account)
2. Emoticon rooms (rooms whos emotes you enabled to be accessible everywhere)
3. Room emoticons (emotes defined in the currently open room)

### Sending

> In places where fancy tab-complete with the emote itself is not possible it is suggested that sending
> the shortcode will convert to the img tag, e.g. sending `Hey there :wave:` will convert to `Hey there <img-for-wave>`.

Reviewer 11: The phrasing is slightly off on this. I'd suggest:

```suggestion
Clients should consider converting shortcodes like `:wave:` to a relevant `<img>` tag for the emoticon.
```

> If there are collisions due to the same emote shortcode being present as both room emote and user emote
> a user could specify the emote source by writing e.g. `:room~wave:` or `:user~wave:`. Here the short
> pack name is used for room emotes, and "user" for user emotes. If a room pack does not have a short
> pack name and has a blank state key, then "room" is used.

Reviewer 11: Phrasing is also a bit awkward on this one as it implies a specified UX requirement, which generally do not make it into the spec:

```suggestion
Clients should also consider supporting ways for the user to find the emoticon they are attempting to send, 
such as having a syntax like `:room~wave:` to find `wave` emoticon in the current room. Alternatives might also
be `user` or pack names to search within.
```

## Current implementations
### Emote rendering (rendering of the `<img>` tag)
 - riot-web
 - revolution
 - nheko
 - fluffychat
### Emote sending, using the mentioned events here
 - revolution

>  - fluffychat

Reviewer 11: this bit can be moved to the PR description for easier checkboxes and visibility - ideally linking to the implementations of the MSC directly for validation purposes within the MSC process.

## Security Considerations

> When sending an `<img>` tag in an end-to-end encrypted room, the client will make a request to fetch

Reviewer 11: it's subtle but important:
```suggestion
When sending an `<img>` tag in an encrypted room, the client will make a request to fetch
```

Matrix only supports end-to-end encryption currently (and likely only ever will tbh), however by overly specifying what kind of encryption it means the feature has to be reconsidered when/if things change.

this could potentially leak part of the conversation. This is **not** a new security consideration,
it already exists. This, however, isn't much different from posting someone a link in an e2ee chat and
the recipient opens the link. Additionally, images, and thus emotes, are often cached by the client,
not even necessarily leading to an http query.

## Alternatives
One can easily think of near infinite ways to implement emotes. The aspect of sending an `<img>` tag
and marking it as an emote with `data-mx-emoticon` seems to be pretty universal though, so the question
is mainly on different emote sources. For that, a separate MSC, [MSC1951](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1951)
already exists, so it is reasonable to compare this one with that one:

### Comparison with MSC1951
MSC1951 defines a dedicated room as the only emote source. This MSC, however, also allows you to bind emotes
to your own account, offering greater flexibility. In MSC1951 there can also only be a single emote
pack in a room. This could be problematic in e.g. bridged rooms: You set some emotes from the matrix

> side and a discord bridge would plop all the discord emotes in another pack in the same room.

Reviewer 11: MSC1951 is more focused on sharing packs with users so they can indeed capture them from other places as needed. Part of the idea is to avoid overwhelming the state of the room with multiple packs, though it could indeed be useful to have a single provider's packs in one place for ease of discovery and general resource usage.

Author: Multiple packs in one room make sense as soon as you have e.g. one room bridged to both discord and slack

Reviewer 14: You can have a "store" using a room of emoji pack rooms.

Author: That sounds like one could easily collect many rooms very quickly :/

Reviewer 8: having more packs per room just seems much more sensible, i don't really see a point to just having a single room dedicated to a pack

MSC1951 defines a way to recommend using a pack of a different room - this MSC does not have an equivalent
to that. Instead, this MSC allows multiple emote packs for a room, and allows you to enable an emote
pack to be globally available for yourself across all rooms you are in.

The core difference is how MSC1951 and this MSC define the emotes themselves: In MSC1951 you have to
set one state event *per emote*. While this might seem like a nice idea on the surface, it doesn't
scale well. There are people who easily use and want hundreds or even thousands of emotes accessible.
A simple dict of shortcode to mxc URI seems more appropriate for this.

Additionally, this MSC has already been used in the wild for roughly two years by some clients, while MSC1951

> only exists in MSC form.

Reviewer 11: MSC1951 is used in the wild, though hasn't been pushed to the surface of clients - this makes sense because they solve different areas of a similar problem.

also putting relative time in an MSC is a recipe for disaster - it'd be best to compare based on where they've been implemented, or simply exclude this statement as it doesn't help the technical merits of the MSC.

In general, MSC1951 feels like a heavier approach to emote sourcs, while this MSC is more lightweight

> and thus should allow for significantly larger packs.

Reviewer 11: MSC1951 is infinitely scalable while this one is limited to a few thousand emotes implicitly by using a single event for everything. This comparison seems flawed.

Author: one emote in MSC1951 needs more bytes than one emote in this MSC. This MSC allows for multiple packs per room.

If you assume state keys can be infinitely long, both MSCs can hold infinite emotes per room.

In practice state keys cannot be infinitely long, though.

Reviewer 11: Those packs are limited by event size in this proposal though, whereas MSC1951 does not limit this. MSC1951 requires more overall resources, but if the argument is that this proposal can store more emotes per pack then the claim is false.

Author: It could be that this was from an idea to be able to make one pack spread multiple state events which didn't make it in this MSC.

Got your point, will adjust :+1:

```

Both the `alt` and the `title` attributes are specified as they serve different purposes: `alt` is
displayed if e.g. the emote does not load. `title` is displayed e.g. on mouse hover over the emote.
Thus, specifying both the `alt` and `title` attributes is required.

The `height` is just a height that looks good on most devices with the normal, default font size.
No width is displayed as to not weirdly squish non-square emotes. In order to maintain backwards-compatibility
with clients not supporting emotes, specifying the `height` is required.

If the new `data-mx-emoticon` attribute has a value it is ignored. Due to limitations of some libraries
the attribute may even look like `data-mx-emoticon=""`.

The `src` attribute *must* be an mxc url. Other URIs, such as `https`, `mailto` etc. are not allowed.

### Emoticon image types
Emoticons are recommended to have a size of about 128x128 pixels. Even though the fallback specifies
a height of 32, this is to ensure that the emotes still look good on higher DPI screens.

Furthermore, emotes should either have a mimetype of `image/png`, `image/gif` or `image/webp`. Emotes

> can be animated.

Reviewer 12: Can we include `image/svg+xml` for nice scalable emoticons?

Author: the problem is that we also need some way to tell the client that those are svg sources, else it will just request a thumbnail from the server.

Also note that that is a suggestions list, and the client might actually send more

Reviewer 6: The media server already sends an appropriate `Content-Type`. The only problem would be clients that don't support SVG.

Author: there is no way to specify a content type on an `<img>` tag, though

Reviewer 12: Sounds like we need [`<picture>`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/picture) support. (out of scope of this MSC)

But this is why the list here is important. If you send an image to a client that doesn't support it there is no way to remediate that (other than adding a new protocol for the client to ask someone else with access to the message to re-encode it) assuming an e2ee context.

Author: that picture tag does not seem to solve the issue of the client knowing before requesting if they would get an svg back or not at all.

Reviewer 8: obviously the scop for another msc, but maybe the media repo could just reply with the svg as the thumbnail ? since there's not really any thumbnailing that can be done to it, beside like converting it to png, *or* instead of just giving an unkown error when an svg thumbnail is requested, it could respond  by saying "vector graphic" or something to that effect, so the client can then request the image normally ?

Author: Additional mechanisms for `<img>` tags are out-of-scope of this MSC. While SVGs are a nice idea, a separate MSC would probably be appropriate.

Due to the low resolution of emotes, `image/jpg`/`image/jpeg` has been purposefully excluded from this
list.

### Emoticon sources
So that emoticons are compatible between different clients, they should follow the emoticon sources
described here.

#### User emoticons
User emotes are per-user emotes that are defined in the user's respective account data. The type for that
is `m.emoticons`, the content of which is as following:

```json
{
  "emoticons": {
    ":emote": {
      "url": "mxc://example.org/blah"
    },
    ":other-emote:": {
      "url": "mxc://example.org/other-blah"
    }
  }
}
```

The emotes are defined inside of a dict called `emoticons`. The key is the shortcode of the emoticon.
The value is an object with `url` as a required field, containing the mxc uri as a string. This is so

> that it is easier for clients or future MSCs to define custom metadata to emotes directly.

Reviewer 12: It would be beneficial to support multiple "names" for the emoitcons. For Example 🙏 is officially called "folded hands" but is often looked up as "prayer", "praying" or even "thanks". Restricting to one name will make finding emoji very difficult.

I think this should be either made into a list, or add a field `additional_names`.

Reviewer 8: i think maybe a queries field would make sense, since for example on discord or slack, the emote is still only presented to the user with a single name, but internally it has several terms you can query to find the emote .

Author: This could be a future MSC

E.g. a discord bridge could set as state key
`de.sorunome.mx-puppet-bridge.discord` and have all the bridged emotes in said state event, keeping
bridged emotes from matrix emotes separate.

The content extends that of the user emotes: It uses the `emoticons` key, which is a map of the shortcode
of the emote to an object containing its mxc url, just as with user emoticons. Additionally, an optional `pack` key can be set,
which defines meta-information on the pack. The following keys for `pack` are valid:

 - `display_name`: (String, optional) An easy display name for the pack. Defaults to the room name,
   if it doesn't exist. This does not have to be unique within all packs of a room.
 - `avatar_url`: (String, optional) The mxc uri of an avatar/icon to display for the pack. Defaults
   to the room avatar, if it doesn't exist. If the room also does not have one, then this pack does
   not have an avatar.
 - `short`: (String, `^[a-z0-9-_]+$`, optional) A short human-readable identifier of the pack. Defaults
   to the normalized state key, and if the state key is blank it defaults to "room". This is used to

>    easily specify which pack to pick an emoticon from, should there be clashes.

Reviewer 12: I'm confused by this property.

- Isn't `display_name` a human-readable identifier for the pack?
- `^[a-z0-9-_]+$` isn't "human-readable". Especially if the user only speaks languages that don't use ASCII characters.
- Does it have to be unique?

Author: Ah, bad wording in the MSC

This was meant to be something machines can easily parse while still being human readable, thus the limit to those characters. Meant for e.g. inputting emotes, like `:packname~emotename:` so like `:foxes~wave:` would specify the `foxes` pack.

As for uniqueness, it is impossible to require it to be unique accross all of federation.

Reviewer 12: I agree that it needs more explanation.

I also am unsure that we want it at all though. Wouldn't people who speak other languages want to use their own character set? Also if they aren't guaranteed to be unique then clients can't do the simple text parsing anyways. I think it would be better UX to let the clients deal with this problem. If they want then can "slugify" the pack name or they can just allow referencing the `display_name`. For example there are many apps that allow typing in people's names with spaces and non-ascii characters and it works just fine. I don't think there is much if any benefit prescribing a syntax for composition in this RFC, especially when it has these downsides.

Author: ooooh, yes, "slug" would be the proper term for this. Totally brainfarted here.

Letting clients slugify the display_name also sounds good 👍

Author: Updated the MSC now

        "short": "new_short_name"
      }
    },
    "!someotherroom:example.org": {
      "": {}
    }
  }
}
```

Here three emote packs are globally accessible to the user: Two defined in `!someroom:example.org`
(one with blank state key and one with state key `de.sorunome.mx-puppet-bridge.discord`) and one in
`!someotherroom:example.org`. The one in `!someroom:example.org` with state key `de.sorunome.mx-puppet-bridge.discord`
has an override for `display_name` and `short` of that pack, so that for this user the pack displays
differently for themselves.

### Emoticon source priority and deduplicating
When giving emoticon suggestions, clients are expected to deduplicate emotes by their mxc url. This
not only ensures that, when viewing a room that you also have in `m.emoticons.rooms`, it won't be
displayed twice, but also if you have e.g. a bot which syncs emotes over multiple rooms, those will
also be deduplicated.

Lastly, in order to have consistent and expected ordering of emotes when suggesting, they should be
suggested in the following order:
1. User emoticons (emotes set to your own account)
2. Emoticon rooms (rooms whos emotes you enabled to be accessible everywhere)

> 3. Room emoticons (emotes defined in the currently open room)

Reviewer 12: This seems too far into client UX territory.

Author: thus suggested, not must.

Author: will re-word that soon anyways 👍

Author: Is this better?

# MSC2545: Image Packs (Emoticons & Stickers)

Emoticons, or short emotes...we need them!

We also need proper stickers, too!

## Terminology
### Emoticons
Since there is a lot of confusion of how this relates to `m.emote`, why this isn't called custom emoji
etc, there it is:

`m.emote` is for emotion - and it has been incorrectly named this way. `m.action` would have been more
appropriate, as you use it to describe *actions*, not *emotions*. E.g. "/me is walking to the gym", or
"/me is happy" and *not* "/me happy".

That, however, is *not* what this MSC is about. Instead it is about emoticons, also known in short as
emotes.

Emoticons are just little images or text describing emotions or other things. Emoji are a subset of
emoticons, namely those found within unicode. Custom emoji here would actually refer to a custom emoji
font, that is your own rendering of 🦊, 🐱, etc., *not* new images. New images is what custom emoticons
are for.

Now, a client may choose to name these however they like, we already have a naming disparity between
spec and clients with groups vs communities. It is, however, imperative to name things in the spec
accurately after what they are.

### Stickers

> Stickers already exits in Matrix. They are reusable images one can send, usually as a reaction sent

Reviewer 15: ```suggestion
Stickers already exist in Matrix. They are reusable images one can send, usually as a reaction sent
```

Signed-off-by: Šimon Brandner <simon.bra.ag@gmail.com>

```

Both the `alt` and the `title` attributes are specified as they serve different purposes: `alt` is
displayed if e.g. the emote does not load. `title` is displayed e.g. on mouse hover over the emote.
Thus, specifying both the `alt` and `title` attributes is required.

The `height` is just a height that looks good on most devices with the normal, default font size.
No width is displayed as to not weirdly squish non-square emotes. In order to maintain backwards-compatibility
with clients not supporting emotes, specifying the `height` is required.

If the new `data-mx-emoticon` attribute has a value it is ignored. Due to limitations of some libraries
the attribute may even look like `data-mx-emoticon=""`.

The `src` attribute *must* be an mxc url. Other URIs, such as `https`, `mailto` etc. are not allowed.

### Sending stickers
To send stickers the already speced `m.sticker` is used.

### Image types
Emoticons are recommended to have a size of about 128x128 pixels. Even though the fallback specifies
a height of 32, this is to ensure that the emotes still look good on higher DPI screens.

> Stickers are recommended to have a size of up to 512x512 pixels.

Reviewer 16: Can we recommend that stickers should be rendered as 256x256, similar to emoticons using 128x128 graphics but rendering as 32x32?

My bridges and maunium-stickerpicker already set the `w` and `h` in the `info` to 256px even though the image is 512px. I'm not sure if it's a good idea to spec that exact behavior though.

Author: the 512x512 recommendation is meant as the image source size, kept a bit higher on purpose for high-DPI-screens or thelike. Should this be clarified better?

Author: Also, note how those are "up to" and not "of about"

Reviewer 16: > Should this be clarified better?

Hmm, I guess actually specifying that clients should render stickers like 256px is out of scope for this MSC

Reviewer 17: The original Stickers MSC defined that, I think, but I don't think it made it into the spec properly?

Author: Resolving conversation as out-of-scope of this MSC

Furthermore, these images should either have a mimetype of `image/png`, `image/gif` or `image/webp`.
They can be animated.

Due to the low resolution of emotes, `image/jpg`/`image/jpeg` has been purposefully excluded from this
list.

### Image pack event
The image pack event has a type of `m.image_pack`. It contains a key `images`, which is a map from a
short code to an image object. It may also contain a key `pack`, which is a pack object.

#### Pack object
The pack object consists of the following keys:
 - `display_name`: (String, optional) A display name for the pack. Defaults to the room name, if the
   image pack event is in the room. This does not have to be unique within all packs of a room.
 - `avatar_url`: (String, optional) The mxc uri of an avatar/icon to dipslay for the pack. Defautls
   to the room avatar, if the pack is in the room. If the room also does not have an avatar, or the
   image pack event is not in a room, this pack does not have an avatar.
 - `usage`: (String[], optional) An array of the usages for this pack. Possible usages are `emoticon`
   and `sticker`. If the usage is absent or empty, a usage for all possible usage types is to be assumed.

>  - `license`: (String, optional) The license of this pack.

Reviewer 9: Is the content of this key intended to be standardised in anyway? Most licences require a copyright line with authorship info. Is the idea that all this goes in here like "Copyright Stuart Mumford CC-BY 4.0" or that this is just a SPDX identifier? Or does the MSC just not care?

My only thought after all those questions is, if it's the "it doesn't matter, put the authorship info in here too" then is the key `license` really the most appropriate?

Author: it is meant as a free text form thingy

Reviewer 9: In that case would "attribution" or a more general name be more applicable. (sorry for picking the nittiest of nits, I just want to encourage people to use it right).

Author: done!

shotcode, optionally with tacked on deliminators.

#### Stickers
When sending a sticker the `body` of the `m.sticker` event should be set to the `body` defined for that
image, or its shortcode, if absent.

Furthermore, the `info` of the `m.sticker` event should be set to the `info` defined for that image,
or a blank object, if absent.

## Security Considerations
When sending an `<img>` tag in an encrypted room, the client will make a request to fetch
said image, in this case an emote. As there is no way to encrypt content behind `<img>` tags yet,
this could potentially leak part of the conversation. This is **not** a new security consideration,
it already exists. This, however, isn't much different from posting someone a link in an e2ee chat and
the recipient opens the link. Additionally, images, and thus emotes, are often cached by the client,
not even necessarily leading to an http query.

Related issue: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/2418

## Unstable prefix
The `m.image_pack` in the account data is replaced with `im.ponies.user_emotes`. The `m.image_pack` in
the room state is replaced with `im.ponies.room_emotes`. The `m.image_pack.rooms` is replaced with

> `im.ponies.room_emotes`.

Reviewer 17: ```suggestion
`im.ponies.emote_rooms`.
```

send them.

## Proposal
### Emoticons in the formatted body
Emoticons have at least a shortcode and an mxc uri. They are sent as `<img>` tags currently already in
the spec, as such existing clients should already be able to render them, though not all clients currently
handle `img` tags. To allow clients to distinguish emoticons from other inline images, a new
property, `data-mx-emoticon`, is introduced. A client can chose to ignore the size attributes of emoticons
when rendering, and instead pick the size based on other circumstances. This could e.g. be used to
display emoticons in messages with only emoticons and emoji larger than usual, which is commonly found in
messengers. Such an `<img>` tag of a shortcode `emote` and an mxc uri `mxc://example.org/emote`
could look as follows:

```html
<img data-mx-emoticon src="mxc://example.org/emote" alt=":emote:" title=":emote:" height="32" />
```

Both the `alt` and the `title` attributes are specified as they serve different purposes: `alt` is
displayed if e.g. the emote does not load. `title` is displayed e.g. on mouse hover over the emote.

> Thus, specifying both the `alt` and `title` attributes is required.

Reviewer: We may want to consider adding a `blurhash` field to this MSC - or [MSC2448](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2448), whichever doesn't land first :yum:

Author: Soru would argue this isn't needed: The MSC makes `data-mx-emoticon` the flag for it being an emote, and the other MSC adds the blurhash to the `<img>` tag. So.....both are additions to `<img>` so no need to mention it explicitly here?

> Thus, specifying both the `alt` and `title` attributes is required.

Reviewer 17: I think the intention isn't to have different values for those, but that browsers need both set, since they are show in different cases.

> Thus, specifying both the `alt` and `title` attributes is required.

Reviewer 18: > @kate-shine, isn't that what the body is for?

We are getting offtopic here, but `m.sticker` has **only** body, which is quite often used for a flavor text accompanying the sticker instead of its description (and that usage is even suggested in spec), and doesn't allow for what uhoreg suggested.

short code to an image object. It may also contain a key `pack`, which is a pack object.

#### Pack object
The pack object consists of the following keys:
 - `display_name`: (String, optional) A display name for the pack. Defaults to the room name, if the
   image pack event is in the room. This does not have to be unique within all packs of a room.
 - `avatar_url`: (String, optional) The mxc uri of an avatar/icon to dipslay for the pack. Defautls
   to the room avatar, if the pack is in the room. If the room also does not have an avatar, or the
   image pack event is not in a room, this pack does not have an avatar.
 - `usage`: (String[], optional) An array of the usages for this pack. Possible usages are `emoticon`
   and `sticker`. If the usage is absent or empty, a usage for all possible usage types is to be assumed.
 - `attribution`: (String, optional) The attribution of this pack.

#### Image object
The image object conists of the following keys:
 - `url`: (String, requried) The mxc URL for this image
 - `body`: (String, optional) An optional body for this image, useful for the sticker body text or
   the emote alt text. Defaults to the short code.

>  - `info`: (`ImageInfo`, optional) The already speced `ImageInfo` object used for the `info` block of

Reviewer 19: Can you clarify on how optional this is? For sending stickers, the ImageInfo is required, while as far as i can tell it is legal according to this MSC to add stickers without ImageInfo

Author: Actually, while the spec for `m.sticker` lists the `info` block as required, all its keys are not. thus, it is spec-compliant to send a blank info block (`"info" : {}`)

   `m.sticker` events.

>  - `usage`: (String[], optional) An array of the usages for this image. If present and non-emtpy,

Reviewer 20: ```suggestion
 - `usage`: (String[], optional) An array of the usages for this image. If present and non-empty,
```

>    this overrides the usage defined at pack level for this particular image.

Reviewer: What is the usecase for overriding the usage abilities per-item in pack? I can see that it would allow more flexibility, but am not sure in what situation that would be helpful.

Author: account data - you only have a single image pack tied to your own account

#### Example image pack event
Taking all this into account, an example pack event may look as following:
```json
{
  "images": {
    "emote": {
      "url": "mxc://example.org/blah"
    },
    "sticker": {
      "url": "mxc://example.org/sticker",
      "usage": ["sticker"]
    }
  },
  "pack": {
    "display_name": "Awesome Pack",
    "usage": ["emoticon"]
  }
}
```

### Image sources

> There are several places where a client is expected to look for these `m.image_pack` events, mainly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are several places where a client is expected to look for these `m.image_pack` objects, mainly
```

Author: But they are events: either an account data event or a room state event

Reviewer: Oh, I think I thought here that `m.image_pack` was a JSON key rather than an event type for some reason.

```suggestion
There are several places where a client is expected to look for events with type `m.image_pack`, mainly
```

:shrug:

in their own account data and in room states.

#### User image packs
Each user can have their own personal image pack defined in their own account data, with the normal
`m.image_pack` event. The user is expected to be presented with these images in all rooms.

#### Room image packs
A room can have an unlimited amount of image packs, by specifying the `m.image_pack` state event with
different state keys. The user is expected to be presented with these images only in the room they
are defined in. To enable them to be presented in all rooms, see the section below.
An empty state key is the default pack for a room.
E.g. a discord bridge could set as state key
`de.sorunome.mx-puppet-bridge.discord` and have all the bridged emotes in said state event, keeping
bridged emotes from matrix emotes separate.

#### Space image packs
Clients should suggest image packs of a space that a room is in, if the user is also in the space.
For that, the client should recursively check the `m.space.parent` state events and suggest emoticons

> and stickers from all the image packs found in those rooms/spaces.

Reviewer: We may want to clarify that a client should only need to discover image packs for Space rooms that the user is actually in?

Author: It does? 

> Clients should suggest image packs of a space that a room is in, **if the user is also in the space**.

Will update to canonical space, though

> 

Reviewer: To be sure, you're saying that image packs sent into the rooms with `type: m.space` themselves should also be shown in child rooms?

Author: correct. the parent way checking is done to ensure canonical spaces are being used

> 

Reviewer: Say I have a space hierarchy of:

```
A-E
|
B-C
|
D
```

where E, C and D are `m.space.child` rooms, and A and B are m.space rooms.

Should an emote from an image pack in C be shown when I'm messaging in E?

Author: The emote packs should depend on `m.space.parent`, not `m.space.child`. That way only emotes of canonical spaces are included.

Author: > Although there may be a usecase for linking to packs of other, disjoint rooms in order to get new emotes/stickers as they're updated, that probably isn't something that should be done through Spaces.

That also sounds like it could easily be a separate MSC

#### Image pack rooms
While room image packs are specific to a room and are only accessible within that room, image pack
rooms should be accessible from everywhere. They do not differentiate themselves from room emotes at
all, instead you set an event in your account data of type `m.image_pack.rooms` which outlines
which room image pack states are globally accessible for that user. For that, a `room` key contains
a map of room ids that map to state keys that map to an object. While this MSC does not define any
contents for this object, having this an object means greater flexibility in case of future changes.

> The the contents of `m.image_pack.rooms` could look like the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The contents of `m.image_pack.rooms` could look like the following:
```

Furthermore, clients are expected to deduplicate images based on their mxc url. This not only ensures
that, when viewing a room that you also have in `m.image_pack.rooms`, it won't be displayed twice,
but also if you have e.g. a bot which syncs emotes over multiple rooms, those will also be deduplicated.

### Sending
#### Emoticons
For emoticons a client could add deliminators (e.g. `:`) around around the image shortcode, meaning
that if an image has a shortcode of `emote`, the user can enter `:emote:` to send it. If there are
multiple emoticons with the same shortcode in a room the client could e.g. slugify the packs display
name and then have the user enter `:slug~emote:`. As slugs typically match `^[\w-]+$` that should
ensure complete-ability.

The alt / title text fo the `<img>` tag is expected to be the `body` of the emote, or, if absent, its
shotcode, optionally with tacked on deliminators.

#### Stickers
When sending a sticker the `body` of the `m.sticker` event should be set to the `body` defined for that
image, or its shortcode, if absent.

Furthermore, the `info` of the `m.sticker` event should be set to the `info` defined for that image,
or a blank object, if absent.

> ## Security Considerations

Reviewer 12: Continuing: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2545#issuecomment-887078884 by @deepbluev7

We need E2EE support because emotes are a significant part of a conversation and shouldn't be leaked to the homeserver. A dramatic comparison would be that we don't need to encrypt exclamation marks because they aren't as important as words. We wouldn't accept a protocol that leaks all exclamation marks to the server so why should we accept a protocol that leaks emotes?

I get that it is mitigated because they are locally cached but with a large number of stickers the server will still see the first time you download each, and can see what the content is. This is especially bad when personal sticker packs become more common and contain possible personal images.

So while there are limits to what we can do here, and commonly used sticker packs will likely be leaked to the homeservers eventually (via unencrypted rooms) I don't think we should be leaking stickers that are only used in E2EE rooms. You could also imaging the security conscious users re-upload their sticker packs and use their own sticker msx URLs.

However as this RFC currently sits a huge number of users are going to unknowingly be leaking more information that they should be homeservers. That doesn't sit well with me.

Reviewer 17: Your comparison with the exclamation marks isn't entirely correct. It is only leaked, that you are loading a specific emote. The server can't know which message the emote is from. Since emotes are just inline images, they can easily be encrypted at the same time that inline images can be encrypted. Until then having an encrypted message body, that references unencrypted images is good enough, imo. Encrypted inline images should be a separate MSC.

Same thing for state events. An MSC for encrypted state events would be very useful, but it can be easily done independently of this MSC. Especially since there are other state events, that benefit much more from being encrypted, like the room topic. Currently most users don't know, that they leak data, if they set a topic. That usually contains sensitive data like logins, meeting locations, links and numbers.

The only thing a user leaks is sticker packs they author. This is the same as when they upload a user avatar or set a topic. So I don't see how this would be a specific consideration for this MSC. Alternatively one could argue, that the server may be able to correlate when a client downloads an emote or sticker to when the user views the event and sends a read receipt. This is however very unreliable and should be fairly rare after loading an emote for the first time or if the user opens the emote picker once.

I don't think there is a clear path to solve that, since you want the mxc URI to change on every download too. Otherwise the server can still correlate what emote is use where. A solution for that would far exceed the complexity this MSC should have imo and as such it should be a separate MSC.

Reviewer 12: > Since emotes are just inline images, they can easily be encrypted at the same time that inline images can be encrypted.

The Security Considerations section seems to disagree.

> As there is no way to encrypt content behind `<img>` tags yet, this could potentially leak part of the conversation.

I think this is something that should be resolved before this RFC is accepted. 

> Until then having an encrypted message body, that references unencrypted images is good enough, imo.

This is the part that I disagree with most strongly. I think that before making sharing images such as this any more common we should figure out how to encrypt them so that servers can't copy and scan the contents. This strong base would allow building things like sticker packs with encryption in mind and similar. If we skip on this then all of the pieces built on top will also defer encryption support.

---

> The only thing a user leaks is sticker packs they author.

That depends on how the sticker pack is shared. Sure, if your server recommends the pack to you then it knows what the images are. But if it is shared from someone you know there is no reason that your server has to learn what the images are. 

---

> I don't think there is a clear path to solve that, since you want the mxc URI to change on every download too. Otherwise the server can still correlate what emote is use where.

I don't think that is necessary. It would be nice for the most paranoid of users but for now I just think that we need a way to attach a key (that the server never sees) to the `<img>` and to include those keys in the pack description which should be encrypted. Then all of these more paranoid options are available to be implemented on top. Sure, it isn't perfect as a single use of a sticker in an unencrypted room will leak the key to those servers. But at least packs only used in encrypted rooms are quite private and the foundation is there to build on top of.

The argument "well we leak a lot anyways, so no harm layering on more leaks" doesn't sit well with me. This is how you never end up having proper privacy in a protocol. Instead we should ensure that foundational pieces such as referencing an image can be done in a way that enabled privacy.

Author: This will be for a future MSC

Reviewer 12: I strongly disagree. Implementing this MSC as-written would be irresponsible and harmful. People would start creating and using sticker packs not knowing that they are leaking data. Few users would expect or understand this feature to leak and few if any clients would warn or prevent them. How (and why) should I be expected to know that uploading an image in an encrypted conversation is protected by E2EE but uploading an image to an image pack and then sharing it in that conversation isn't? 

Matrix claims to be "An open network for **secure**, decentralized communication" but if mistakes like this keep being made we should strip all mentions of E2EE from the homepage. Unless they come with disclaimers like "a few features are protected by E2EE". As it is clear that security and privacy are not a priority. 

You don't create a secure protocol but loading in insecure features and hope that someone will come by later and slather on some encryption. You get a secure protocol by ensuring that every feature is secure and privacy respecting before it is allowed into the spec. If a messenger like Signal that is serious about privacy released a feature like this people would complain like no tomorrow. The fact that this is even being considered in it's current state shows how little the people running Matrix care about privacy.

Reviewer 17: Encrypted state events are a different MSC. Please direct your concern at all other MSCs, that also use state events, like group calls. It is not reasonable to have this specific MSC solve a very complicated problem, that is at least as much a concern to elements already in the spec and other MSCs. Topics are unencrypted, room names and avatars are unencrypted, member names and reactions are unencrypted and group call states are unencrypted. Why single this MSC out, that is already complex enough and has a lot of other open discussions, instead of just accepting that encrypted state events are an orthogonal problem and should be solved for all of them?

In 90% of cases emoticons and stickers are used in public rooms and not having them there is a significant issue. Please don't vent your anger at some random contributor, that is already struggling to manage time and energy on this MSC. Direct it to the core spec team, or better yet, be constructive. We now have the first MSC exploring signed membership: #3917 . That is a prerequisite to having encrypted state. Once we can encrypt state, this MSC automatically can be encrypted as well. Let's keep the focus on the sharing packs of images here, please.

Reviewer 12: IIUC even signed state events aren't enough to provide E2EE for this feature. 

What I see is that maybe Matrix isn't quite ready for this MSC yet. I know it sucks to delay features because foundational work hasn't been done yet but that is the responsible thing to do. 

> Topics are unencrypted...

Yes, let's not make this worse. We need to avoid letting the broken-window effect making this problem forever worse. 

> Direct it to the core spec team, or better yet, be constructive.

I'm sorry, I thought this is what I was doing. I was raising issues that I see to be blocking this MSC so that the core team can consider them before accepting. If there is a better avenue to do that (as I agree that this issue is not specific to only this MSC) please let me know what that is.

Reviewer 17: > IIUC even signed state events aren't enough to provide E2EE for this feature.

No, but signed state events are a requirement to be able to share encryption keys for encrypted state events in a reasonable manner.

> I'm sorry, I thought this is what I was doing. I was raising issues that I see to be blocking this MSC so that the core team can consider them before accepting. If there is a better avenue to do that (as I agree that this issue is not specific to only this MSC) please let me know what that is.

In my opinion it is much worse to have a room topic be unencrypted than having a list of stickers be unencrypted. This MSC just replaces an existing unencrypted way of hosting stickers with a federated and user controlled one. There is already an issue open to be able to encrypt state events as well as a few MSCs working in that direction. Blocking this MSC indefinitely on that might be fine, but then please link to the relevant issues and MSCs. There are MSCs in progress by the core team or people being paid to work on Matrix, that also send unencrypted state events (location sharing, group calls, etc). The author of this MSC doesn't have the funding to develop such a foundational feature, so pointing at who else is solving this or accepting that the solution will be a different MSC would go a long step to actually resolving concerns on this MSC, that affect the functionality of this MSC instead of a lower layer (like state events). Throwing "Matrix should remove secure and encrypted from their branding" at the head of someone who just wants to be able to send emoticons, while that author already wrote suggestions about how to be able to encrypt reactions and other relations, is simply targeting the wrong people.

Reviewer 12: >  is much worse to have a room topic be unencrypted than having a list of stickers be unencrypted.

Sure, but this is mostly unrelated to this MSC. We shouldn't make things worse just because they are already bad.

> Blocking this MSC indefinitely on that might be fine, but then please link to the relevant issues and MSCs.

That is what I am proposing on doing. We can definitely gather related MSCs (I see you have linked a few, thanks) and track there progress. But please note that the core reason I think his MSC isn't ready yet isn't any specific MSC or issue but that fact that it adds more unencrypted state which I don't think needs to be added. I understand that solving this likely requires some other MSCs to land first, but the exact MSCs are nto completely clear yet.

> Throwing "Matrix should remove secure and encrypted from their branding" at the head of someone who just wants to be able to send emoticons, while that author already wrote suggestions about how to be able to encrypt reactions and other relations, is simply targeting the wrong people.

Fair point, I apologize for that. It was an attempt to emphasize why I disagree with the author's statement that this concern should be handled in a future MSC. I didn't mean to suggest that they are the one in power to change that. Just why I don't think this MSC as written aligns with the Matrix Foundation's stated goals.

---

So to summarize my opinion:

1. I don't think this proposal should be accepted until it is possible to create and use sticker packs without leaking the contents of the stickers to homeservers when used in E2EE rooms.
2. I understand that other MSCs will be required in order to satisfy the privacy requirements for 1.
3. I think that the MSCs in 2 need to land **before** this MSC so that:
  a. We don't end up with people using this feature assuming it is E2EE and compromising their privacy.
  b. We have a single version of the sticker protocol, not one encrypted version and one non-encrypted version.

Reviewer 12: One other approach that may work and allow this to move forward quicker is I would consider approving of this MSC if it was written such that it would be private and secure **assuming** that state events are encrypted. Even if that isn't currently the case.

This is not the best solution as it makes a big assumption and still will leak data until the encryption of state events lands but seeing as we have proposals such as https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/3917 and it is likely that some form of private and secure state events will land to fix issues such as room topics.

Reviewer 9: I think that blocking this feature that is heavily requested completely because it can't be secure in E2EE rooms is silly.

As Nico says, the main use of this feature (imo) would be in public rooms anyway, and clients could choose to disable it or throw a big red warning in E2EE rooms (just as they could do for other things at the moment).

If you have specific concerns about how this MSC works that you think are incompatible with the current state of the encrypted state proposals then I think they would be very constructive points to add to the discussion.

Reviewer 12: > I think that blocking this feature that is heavily requested completely because it can't be secure in E2EE rooms is silly.

I think we have different values and won't agree here.

> the main use of this feature (imo) would be in public rooms anyway

I don't see why this would be "mainly" in public rooms. I've created private sticker packs with funny photos of friends in the past.

> If you have specific concerns about how this MSC works that you think are incompatible with the current state of the encrypted state proposals

I don't see any specific incompatibilities however it seems that even with those proposals this will reveal unnecessary information to the homeservers.

Reviewer 12: My specific comment is that the image data is sent in plaintext to the homeserver. My ideal solution would not even have the ability to do this but I would at least like to see the option to not send any plaintext image data to the homeserver.

My current rough concept is:
- Add a required encryption key to each `Image` object.
- Include the encryption key in the `<img>` tag when using the image.

There is likely also a bit of metadata around algorithm required in each of these places.

This would leak the data of all images if the sticker pack is shared in an unencrypted room or unencrypted account data and leak the data of images used in unencrypted messages. This seems reasonable to me. Sticker packs never used in unencrypted places would not be leaked to anyone but the recipients (either revealed image-by-image or by pack if the pack is shared).

The downside is that currently this isn't enough to provide secure stickers as state events and account data can't currently be encrypted. However I think it is a reasonable compromise to assume that these types of data will gain encryption support in the future and ship the MSC today as it will be "automatically upgraded" to support encryption rather than creating a second version of the protocol in the future.

Reviewer 12: Just to be clear that this concern is not resolved. It is still an open concern and at the very least should be mentioned in the "Security Considerations" section. Although I think not blocking this RFC until it respects users privacy is a bad idea (but understand that other people have different priorities).

Reviewer 12: Thank you for including this consideration in the MSC so that it can be explicitly considered.

Reviewer: @kevincox thanks for bringing this up. I've attempted to address the concerns sufficiently in https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2545/commits/c24374872d4ae134928e40e57016e017c898ae71.

Reviewer 21: I think with c243748 and MSC3414 in general, this chain _could_ be marked as resolved.
I personally think it _should_ be, especially considered the existing adoption of this MSC, but if not then MSC3414 should probably be listed more noticeably as a requirement.

Reviewer: Given there's been no other input, let's resolve it then.

## Unstable prefix
The `m.image_pack` in the account data is replaced with `im.ponies.user_emotes`. The `m.image_pack` in
the room state is replaced with `im.ponies.room_emotes`. The `m.image_pack.rooms` is replaced with
`im.ponies.emote_rooms`.

Some existing implementations using `im.ponies.user_emotes` and `im.ponies.room_emotes` currently use
a dict called `short` which is just a map of the shortcode to the mxc url.

Some other implementations currently also call the `images` key `emoticons`.

## Alternatives
One can easily think of near infinite ways to implement emotes. The aspect of sending an `<img>` tag
and marking it as an emote with `data-mx-emoticon` seems to be pretty universal though, so the question
is mainly on different emote sources. For that, a separate MSC, [MSC1951](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1951)
already exists, so it is reasonable to compare this one with that one:

### Comparison with MSC1951
MSC1951 defines a dedicated room as the only image pack source. This MSC, however, also allows you to bind image packs
to your own account, offering greater flexibility. In MSC1951 there can also only be a single image pack

> pack in a room. This could be problematic in e.g. bridged rooms: You set some emotes or stickers from the matrix

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in a room. This could be problematic in e.g. bridged rooms: You set some emotes or stickers from the matrix
```

chat in anyways. Furthermore it allows you to enable an image pack to be globally available for yourself
across all rooms you are in.

The core difference is how MSC1951 and this MSC define the image packs themselves: In MSC1951 you have to
set one state event *per image*. While this might seem like a nice idea on the surface, it doesn't
scale well. There are people who easily use and want hundreds or even thousands of image packs accessible.
A simple dict of shortcode to mxc URI seems more appropriate for this.

In general, MSC1951 feels like a heavier approach to image pack sources, while this MSC is more lightweight.

## Looking further
A couple of interesting points have been raised in the discussions of this MSC tangentially touch
custom emoticons but warrant an MSC for themselves, as they touch more on how `<img>` is working.
 - Figuring out how `<img>` should work with encrypted media.
 - Allow SVGs in the `<img>` tag. Current problem: Clients typically try to thumbnail the mxc URL,
   and most media repositories can't thumbnail SVGs. Possible solution: Somehow embed the mimetype.

>  - For stickers: Recommend rendering sizes / resolutions

Reviewer: I'd love to also embed custom emotes into reactions - and having clients suggest that from the available image packs. However, I understand that aggregations are still outstanding from the spec...

Reviewer 17: I think Revolution can do custom reactions based on this, but image reactions should probably be its own MSC. Using the emotes from a pack like this should be easily doable, but figuring out how the reaction should look might cause a lot of bikeshedding. Currently those clients just react with an mxc uri as the key.

Author: Yeah, emote reactions should be its own MSC. Soru can think that, in general, something like having a format for reactions: Current reactions can combine emojis and text, it's only a matter of time until people want to combine custom emotes, emojis and text into a single reaction.

> # MSC2545: Image Packs (Emoticons & Stickers)

Reviewer: Hello! I took another read-through this MSC today, and along with the points below I made some readability and clarification-related edits along the way. These are contained in https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/commit/364256e579b4886c6f668f6c8c5d48852831fe88.

Feel free to incorporate them if you wish!

> # MSC2545: Image Packs (Emoticons & Stickers)

Reviewer 22: FYI Cinny [implements this MSC fully](https://github.com/cinnyapp/cinny/pull/686) so could be added in implementations.

Reviewer: Thank you! I've added the link to the relevant places in the PR description.

The `height` is just a height that looks good on most devices with the normal, default font size.
No width is displayed as to not weirdly squish non-square emotes. In order to maintain backwards-compatibility
with clients not supporting emotes, specifying the `height` is required.

If the new `data-mx-emoticon` attribute has a value it is ignored. Due to limitations of some libraries
the attribute may even look like `data-mx-emoticon=""`.

The `src` attribute *must* be an mxc url. Other URIs, such as `https`, `mailto` etc. are not allowed.

### Sending stickers
To send stickers the already speced `m.sticker` is used.

### Image types
Emoticons are recommended to have a size of about 128x128 pixels. Even though the fallback specifies
a height of 32, this is to ensure that the emotes still look good on higher DPI screens.

Stickers are recommended to have a size of up to 512x512 pixels.

Furthermore, these images should either have a mimetype of `image/png`, `image/gif` or `image/webp`.
They can be animated.

Due to the low resolution of emotes, `image/jpg`/`image/jpeg` has been purposefully excluded from this
list.

> ### Image pack event

Reviewer 23: It would be quite useful to provide a canonical reference to each pack and image in the pack. Such as packid = roomid:statekey, and imageid = roomid:statekey:imagekey. This can have many potential uses, such as making sent stickers and emojis sharable. Defining how these keys can be used may be out of scope, but I believe that it should be a hard requirement that an image or pack be uniquely identifiable by a string id somehow.

Author: That is not necessarily needed, as a futur MSC could just add the roomid and statekey to the sticker event / the img data and then the identifier would be a tuple and doesn't have to be a string that is parsed extra

The image pack event has a type of `m.image_pack`. It contains a key `images`, which is a map from a
short code to an image object. It may also contain a key `pack`, which is a pack object.

#### Pack object
The pack object consists of the following keys:
 - `display_name`: (String, optional) A display name for the pack. Defaults to the room name, if the
   image pack event is in the room. This does not have to be unique within all packs of a room.

>  - `avatar_url`: (String, optional) The mxc uri of an avatar/icon to dipslay for the pack. Defautls

Reviewer 24: ```suggestion
 - `avatar_url`: (String, optional) The mxc uri of an avatar/icon to dipslay for the pack. Defaults
```

>  - `avatar_url`: (String, optional) The mxc uri of an avatar/icon to dipslay for the pack. Defautls

Reviewer 25: ```suggestion
 - `avatar_url`: (String, optional) The mxc uri of an avatar/icon to display for the pack. Defautls
```

Reviewer 26: Defaults, even

   to the room avatar, if the pack is in the room. If the room also does not have an avatar, or the

>    image pack event is not in a room, this pack does not have an avatar.

Author: but avatar_url would be more consistent with the remaining spec?

>    image pack event is not in a room, this pack does not have an avatar.

Reviewer: After 3 years, I no longer think this *needs* to be `icon_url`. `avatar_url` is fine.

 - `usage`: (String[], optional) An array of the usages for this pack. Possible usages are `emoticon`
   and `sticker`. If the usage is absent or empty, a usage for all possible usage types is to be assumed.
 - `attribution`: (String, optional) The attribution of this pack.

#### Image object
The image object conists of the following keys:
 - `url`: (String, requried) The mxc URL for this image
 - `body`: (String, optional) An optional body for this image, useful for the sticker body text or
   the emote alt text. Defaults to the short code.
 - `info`: (`ImageInfo`, optional) The already speced `ImageInfo` object used for the `info` block of
   `m.sticker` events.
 - `usage`: (String[], optional) An array of the usages for this image. If present and non-empty,
   this overrides the usage defined at pack level for this particular image. This is useful to e.g.
   have one pack contain mixed emotes and stickers. Additionally there is only a single account data
   level image pack, meaning this is required to have a mixture of emotes and stickers available in
   account data.

> #### Example image pack event

Reviewer 27: > This representation also ends up requiring a unique string slug for each image in the pack. This will affect bridging from other services that don't provide slugs, such as Telegram, and also prevents multiple images in a pack from having the same slug, which may be desirable. A possible mitigation is to put random garbage in the keys, but this will result in a terrible customer experience if these slugs are to be used for suggestions.

Bridges could use something like npm's [`slug`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/slug). I don't think we should give up a valuable feature because it *might* not work for *some* bridges.

> #### Example image pack event

Reviewer 18: Thanks for suggestions! I sadly didn't have time to work on MSC update yet, but I have it scheduled for following week or two, so this came in a really great time. The ordering issue sounds like a right call, while the ordering mentioned in spec is mostly tied to ordering of priorities for various sources, it is a good idea to have ordering predictable in the source itself as well.

I'm really not sure about making slugs optional though. If I understand Telegram sticker packs correctly, they do contain at least the emoji identifier, which can be slugified (even if it might not be an ideal representation). Having at least some placeholder for emoticon instead of no placeholder at all still sounds like a good thing to have.

> #### Example image pack event

Reviewer 12: I find this argument compelling. The editor may choose to sort alphabetically but having the ability to order in the protocol seems valuable. 

I would say that the protocol should have ordering and clients *should* display the stickers in that order. Of course they don't have to which opens the door for per-user ordering use-vased ordering or other UIs.

> #### Example image pack event

Author: Soru didn't do image ordering with an array because of the inflated size the event will have; image packs are still bound by the 65k limit for events over federation.

@kate-shine had the idea to put the ordering in a different, separate, event, so that a user can also easily override the order for themself and/or frequent usage can be easily tracked

Taking all this into account, an example pack event may look as following:
```json
{
  "images": {
    "emote": {
      "url": "mxc://example.org/blah"
    },
    "sticker": {
      "url": "mxc://example.org/sticker",
      "usage": ["sticker"]
    }
  },
  "pack": {
    "display_name": "Awesome Pack",
    "usage": ["emoticon"]
  }
}
```

### Image sources
There are several places where a client is expected to look for these `m.image_pack` events, mainly

> in their own account data and in room states.

Author: That is already a problem that clients should be conscious of throughout all the spec and thus it isn't job of this MSC to re-iterate that.

#### User image packs
Each user can have their own personal image pack defined in their own account data, with the normal
`m.image_pack` event. The user is expected to be presented with these images in all rooms.

#### Room image packs
A room can have an unlimited amount of image packs, by specifying the `m.image_pack` state event with
different state keys. The user is expected to be presented with these images only in the room they
are defined in. To enable them to be presented in all rooms, see the section below.

> An empty state key is the default pack for a room.

Author: Hmm, not really, good point

E.g. a discord bridge could set as state key
`de.sorunome.mx-puppet-bridge.discord` and have all the bridged emotes in said state event, keeping
bridged emotes from matrix emotes separate.

#### Space image packs
Clients should suggest image packs of a canonical space that a room is in, if the user is also in the
space. This should be done recursively on canonical spaces. So, if a room has a canonical space and
that space again has a canonical space, the clients should suggest image packs of both of those spaces.

#### Image pack rooms

> While room image packs are specific to a room and are only accessible within that room, image pack

Reviewer 18: Room types weren't a thing at the point of time where this spec was written. Thank you for reminder!

> While room image packs are specific to a room and are only accessible within that room, image pack

Reviewer 11: https://spec.matrix.org/v1.3/client-server-api/#types ?

> While room image packs are specific to a room and are only accessible within that room, image pack

Reviewer 17: Hm, seems like it actually made it into the spec, although I remember the discussion on the spaces MSC to originally go differently.

> While room image packs are specific to a room and are only accessible within that room, image pack

Author: That is something orthogonal to this MSC and should be in a new MSC then, to not feature creep this one.

rooms should be accessible from everywhere. They do not differentiate themselves from room emotes at
all, instead you set an event in your account data of type `m.image_pack.rooms` which outlines
which room image pack states are globally accessible for that user. For that, a `room` key contains
a map of room ids that map to state keys that map to an object. While this MSC does not define any
contents for this object, having this an object means greater flexibility in case of future changes.
The contents of `m.image_pack.rooms` could look like the following:

```json
{
  "rooms": {
    "!someroom:example.org": {
      "": {},
      "de.sorunome.mx-puppet-bridge.discord": {}
    },
    "!someotherroom:example.org": {
      "": {}
    }
  }
}
```

Here three emote packs are globally accessible to the user: Two defined in `!someroom:example.org`
(one with blank state key and one with state key `de.sorunome.mx-puppet-bridge.discord`) and one in
`!someotherroom:example.org`.

> ### Image pack source priority and deduplicating

Reviewer 27: +1 for dropping, UI details should be dependent on the client UI implementation.

> ### Image pack source priority and deduplicating

Author: > A more direct approach to this would be to provide a way for multiple rooms to share the same underlying image pack (which might be out of scope for this MSC).

well, since the writing of the msc spaces have been a thing so you could just attach the sticker pack to the space

> ### Image pack source priority and deduplicating

Author: soru said now deduplication should be done and suggests mxc URIs, how clients actually do that is up to them

1. User image pack (images set in your own account)
2. Image pack rooms (rooms whos image packs you enabled to be accessible everywhere)
3. Space image packs (packs sent in the space, if present)
4. Room image packs (images defined in the currently open room)

Furthermore, clients are expected to deduplicate images based on their mxc url. This not only ensures
that, when viewing a room that you also have in `m.image_pack.rooms`, it won't be displayed twice,
but also if you have e.g. a bot which syncs emotes over multiple rooms, those will also be deduplicated.

### Sending
#### Emoticons
For emoticons a client could add deliminators (e.g. `:`) around around the image shortcode, meaning
that if an image has a shortcode of `emote`, the user can enter `:emote:` to send it. If there are
multiple emoticons with the same shortcode in a room the client could e.g. slugify the packs display
name and then have the user enter `:slug~emote:`. As slugs typically match `^[\w-]+$` that should
ensure complete-ability.

The alt / title text fo the `<img>` tag is expected to be the `body` of the emote, or, if absent, its
shotcode, optionally with tacked on deliminators.

> 

Reviewer: What if different clients decide to use different deliminators? Would it be confusing for my client, which typically uses `:` as a deliminator, to see `$shortcode$` when hovering over an emote?

Suggesting clients not place deliminators in the `alt` / `title` text would solve this.

Author: Good point :+1:

#### Stickers
When sending a sticker the `body` of the `m.sticker` event should be set to the `body` defined for that
image, or its shortcode, if absent.

Furthermore, the `info` of the `m.sticker` event should be set to the `info` defined for that image,
or a blank object, if absent.

> 

Reviewer 17: Split off from https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2545/files#r753839678

It would be great to also have some metadata you could opt into for stickers and emotes, that would allow a user to then also add that pack, if sent in a different room without having to ask for it.

Maybe sharing as a whole could be a follow up MSC, which defines sharable links, recommendation events as well as metadata to add a pack, when you got sent one of its stickers.

Author: Yeah, that would be a follow-up MSC

is mainly on different emote sources. For that, a separate MSC, [MSC1951](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1951)
already exists, so it is reasonable to compare this one with that one:

### Comparison with MSC1951
MSC1951 defines a dedicated room as the only image pack source. This MSC, however, also allows you to bind image packs
to your own account, offering greater flexibility. In MSC1951 there can also only be a single image pack
in a room. This could be problematic in e.g. bridged rooms: You set some emotes or stickers from the matrix
side and a discord bridge would plop all the discord emotes and stickers in another pack in the same room.

The original sharing-focused idea of MSC1951 is still preserved: Once room types are a thing, you could
still easily have an image pack-only room.

MSC1951 defines a way to recommend using a pack of a different room - this MSC does not have an equivalent
to that. Instead, this MSC allows multiple image packs for a room, typically one where you already
chat in anyways. Furthermore it allows you to enable an image pack to be globally available for yourself

> across all rooms you are in.

Reviewer: This strikes me as something that may actually be potentially useful to include in this MSC. And this MSC does have somewhat of an equivalent; namely space image packs.

The concept of space image packs makes perfect sense to me, especially when bridging from Discord. When you bridge a Discord server - where custom emoji are defined at the server level - duplicating/maintaining the emote info per-room would be a nightmare. Instead, you can just shove all Matrix rooms mapped to Discord channels in a space, and then define all the emotes in that space.

Suppose another usecase though, where I had two rooms which contained image packs I enjoyed. Say one for [ponymotes](https://ponymotes.net/bpm/), and one for a collection of [super cool stickers](https://telegramchannels.me/stickers/s-prtyparrot). I don't maintain either of the image pack rooms, and am thankful to those that do.

I want images from both packs to appear for users in my room, and perhaps I don't want to ask my users to enable each of these packs globally to make that happen.

I don't think this usecase is possible with what's currently defined in this MSC. It could be made possible by having the ability for rooms to reference other room IDs, which clients should suggest image packs from (if the user is joined to that room). Say by having an `m.image_pack.rooms` state event in the room.

I don't consider this a blocker for this MSC though - rather just something that may be considered for adding down the line if the usecase becomes necessary.

Reviewer 17: One related thing, that would be very useful, is if a sticker could have a reference to what pack it came from, so that a user can just click on it to add it instead of having to ask around. Would probably need to be optional though.

Reviewer: That's a good idea! Though could you create a new thread for it?

I'm also conscious of scope-creeping this MSC further, so maybe the above and referencing packs could land in a separate MSC.

Author: Space image packs are already a thing as per this MSC

> # MSC2545: Image Packs (Emoticons & Stickers)

Reviewer 13: Since this MSC will intersect with MSC3911, I think we should consider this blocked until MSC3911 (or some other solution to the issues solved by that MSC) is merged.

Reviewer 7: I'm not sure this has to be blocked on MSC3911 - MSC2545 is already in use in the wild all over the place. MSC3911 will need to figure out how to address it, but not block the whole of this on media linking/auth.

Reviewer 28: so, is this conversation resolved as MSC2545 isn't blocking on MSC3911?

something sent in the timeline. This MSC adds a way to distribute and define a source for a client to
send them.

## Proposal
### Emoticons in the formatted body
Emoticons have at least a shortcode and a mxc uri. They are sent as `<img>` tags, which are currently in
the spec. As such, many existing clients are able to render them.
To allow clients to distinguish emoticons from other inline images, a new
property, `data-mx-emoticon`, is introduced. A client can choose to ignore the size attributes of emoticons
when rendering, and instead pick the size based on other circumstances. This could e.g. be used to
display messages with only emoticons and emoji as larger than usual, which is commonly found in
messengers. Such an `<img>` tag of a shortcode `emote` and a mxc uri `mxc://example.org/emote`
could look as follows:

```html
<img data-mx-emoticon src="mxc://example.org/emote" alt=":emote:" title=":emote:" height="32" />
```

Both the `alt` and the `title` attributes are specified as they serve different purposes: `alt` is
displayed if e.g. the emote does not load. `title` is displayed e.g. on mouse hover over the emote.

> Thus, specifying both the `alt` and `title` attributes is required.

Reviewer 20: I'd prefer to make the `alt` and `title` required for emoticons.  The image packs already associate a shortcode with the images, which can be used for those, so it won't be hard for the clients to supply them.  And having them is good for accessibility (even for those who do not have visual impairment).

> The `height` is just a height that looks good on most devices with the normal, default font size.

Reviewer 29: shouldn't it be the receiver that decides what "emoji" size is appropriate to fit the text line height? after all the receiver also "decides" what size to show the local real emoji in (by selecting font and font size), and supposedly custom emoji should fit in with that.

> The `height` is just a height that looks good on most devices with the normal, default font size.

Reviewer 30: Yeah, I imagine it's good for accessibility for the reciever to decide what size to render font/emoji/sticker/image embeds/etc. Usually though, you just have font and/or global scaling that makes everything bigger/smaller.

I think the suggestion here is that the spec should just clearly _recommend_ a sensisible default "that looks good on most devices with the normal, default font size." which clients are free to deviate from based on their design.

> The `height` is just a height that looks good on most devices with the normal, default font size.

Reviewer 17: In practice currently all clients set the default size to 32px and then when rendering it locally, they set it to some size based on their font size, if the data-mx-emoticon attribute is set on an image.

> The `height` is just a height that looks good on most devices with the normal, default font size.

Reviewer: Thanks all. I've documented this in c429552d.

No width is displayed as to not weirdly squish non-square emotes. In order to maintain backwards-compatibility
with clients not supporting emotes, specifying the `height` is required.

If the new `data-mx-emoticon` attribute has a value, it is ignored. Due to limitations of some libraries
the attribute may even look like `data-mx-emoticon=""`.

> The `src` attribute *must* be a mxc url. Other URIs, such as `https`, `mailto` etc. are not allowed.

Reviewer: I've applied the suggestion in the first comment in a separate commit.

> We need consequences listed: does the event not get rendered, or just the emoticon?

I don't see why the rest of the event should not be rendered. It'd be ideal to still be able to see the text in a message, even if the emotes aren't formatted properly (and are thus not rendered). Do you agree?

### Sending stickers
To send stickers, the already spec'd `m.sticker` is used.

### Image types
Emoticons are recommended to have a size of about 128x128 pixels. Even though the fallback specifies
a height of 32, this is to ensure that the emotes still look good on higher DPI screens.

Stickers are recommended to have a size of up to 512x512 pixels.

Furthermore, these images should either have a mimetype of `image/png`, `image/gif` or `image/webp`.
They can be animated.

Due to the low resolution of emotes, `image/jpg` and `image/jpeg` have been purposefully excluded from this

> list.

Reviewer 31: I really don't like this part. People shouldn't be forced to convert perfectly fine jpeg images.

Author: Soru would prefer to not have image type suggestions, but, if sorus memory serves her correctly, this was added on @turt2live 's suggestion

Reviewer 29: > doesn't appear to supply a list of supported mimetypes?

yeah. my suggestion is to not define it here, but back of the definition for m.image, which is missing as of yet and is tracked by above spec issue.

Reviewer 32: I think we should NOT limit the types. New media formats can appear and get used over time.

Also, jpg is not "unsuitable" for emoticons in any way. There are even people who prefer them to be of low quality and/or low resolution. It is not uncommon in the Mandarin-speaking communities to think that having low quality is a *desired* trait of emoticons.

> For now, shall we simply recommend clients SHOULD use a core list?

This is a good suggestion to recommend that clients *at least* support certain formats.

Reviewer: I've captured this in d4e9cd22.

### Image pack event
The image pack event has a type of `m.image_pack`. It contains a key `images`, which is a map from a
short code to an image object. It may also contain a key `pack`, which is a pack object, described in
the following section.

#### Pack object
The pack object consists of the following keys:
 - `display_name`: (String, optional) A display name for the pack. Defaults to the room name, if the
   image pack event is in the room. This does not have to be unique from other packs in a room.
 - `avatar_url`: (String, optional) The mxc uri of an avatar/icon to display for the pack. Defaults
   to the room avatar, if the pack is in the room. Otherwise, the pack does not have an avatar.

>  - `usage`: (String[], optional) An array of the usages for this pack. Possible usages are `"emoticon"`

Reviewer 20: I wonder if it's worth allowing implementations to create their own usages, in which case, we probably want the usages to be `m.emoticon` and `m.sticker`, and have the custom usages follow the Java package naming convention as usual.

Reviewer 20: Agreed.  It just seems to me like naming it `m.emoticon` instead of just `emoticon` makes it easier and clearer.  Anyways, it's a non-blocking comment.

Reviewer: Has anyone seen any use cases for additional "usages" in the wild while this MSC has been implemented? @deepbluev7 perhaps?

If not, perhaps it's just best to leave this as is.

Reviewer 19: > One client developer (can anyone remember who?)

that was me

> On the other hand, @deepbluev7 argued that they liked being able to import a pack containing both emotes and stickers at the same time. Perhaps there could be no usage field at all; any pack you import can immediately be used for both stickers and emotes.

What does "import" mean exactly here? from some kind of export format?
I guess nothing stops one from having both stickers and emoticons in the same "export file" and importing both simultaneously

Reviewer 19: My general concern still remains, but I don't think this should hold up the process here - I'm happy enough with the current UX of my implementation of this MSC

flexibility in the case of future changes.

The contents of `m.image_pack.rooms` could look like the following:

```json
{
  "rooms": {
    "!someroom:example.org": {
      "": {},
      "de.sorunome.mx-puppet-bridge.discord": {}
    },
    "!someotherroom:example.org": {
      "": {}
    }
  }
}
```

Here three emote packs are globally accessible to the user: Two defined in `!someroom:example.org`
(one with blank state key and one with state key `de.sorunome.mx-puppet-bridge.discord`) and one in
`!someotherroom:example.org` (with a blank state key).

### Image pack source priority and deduplicating
If a client gives image suggestions (emotes, stickers) to the user in some ordered fashion (e.g. an
ordered list where you click an entry), the order of the images should be predictable between rooms.
A suggestion for clients of image pack ordering is as follows:
1. User image pack (defined in your own account data)
2. Image pack rooms (defined in the `m.image_pack.rooms` account data object)
3. Space image packs (defined in the hierarchy of canonical spaces for the current room)
4. Room image packs (defined in the currently open room's state)

> Furthermore, clients are expected to de-duplicate images so that same images are not displayed multiple

Reviewer: It also makes it more difficult to manage packs, in case you want to manually remove duplicates.

Perhaps it would make more sense to only de-duplicate packs themselves?

> Furthermore, clients are expected to de-duplicate images so that same images are not displayed multiple

Reviewer 30: Also, less relevant and only marginally importnat, but assuming you can click on a sticker to view it's name in the chat like you can with discord stickers/emojis, that should probably be taken into account.

So if you have a smug/grimacing face in one pack titled "I'm gonna get u" and the same sticker in another pack titled "satisfied", you _could_ potentially want to send the different stickers in different rooms, on the assumption that people are gonna click and read the name. And you'll probably search the sticker by the name you intend to convey.

Whether people actually use emojis/stickers like that is up to debate, but hey, I like naming my emoji nicely in discord, so I can kind of see it.

---

If de-duplicating is "automatic", then don't know if it's really even necessary. I don't see why a user shouldn't be able to just put 400 of the same sticker in a pack if they wanted to. They probably won't anyway, buf if they do it as a joke, who cares. Feels like slightly wasted development time to me to put an arbitrary restriction.

A button to remove duplicates in the pack on demand sounds cool though, makes life easier if you just have a big sticker folder that might have a few repeating images, e.g. from downloading/collecting stickers you see manually.

> Furthermore, clients are expected to de-duplicate images so that same images are not displayed multiple

Reviewer: > A button to remove duplicates in the pack on demand sounds cool though, makes life easier if you just have a big sticker folder that might have a few repeating images, e.g. from downloading/collecting stickers you see manually.

Good idea, though this can be implemented in the client. The current spec won't get in the way of such a client feature.

> Furthermore, clients are expected to de-duplicate images so that same images are not displayed multiple

Reviewer: @deepbluev7 What are your thoughts on this, given your experience with implementing this MSC?

> Furthermore, clients are expected to de-duplicate images so that same images are not displayed multiple

Reviewer 28: So it seems that de-duplication of emotes should be removed from the MSC?

> Furthermore, clients are expected to de-duplicate images so that same images are not displayed multiple

Reviewer 28: @Sorunome

> Furthermore, clients are expected to de-duplicate images so that same images are not displayed multiple

Reviewer: Given that nobody has returned with a rebuttal to push for de-duplication, I'm opting to resolve this discussion. The suggestion of de-duplication has been removed from the MSC text in [2366ffd](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2545/commits/2366ffd71009ae471f91404c3278c0a38908c823).

times. Such scenarios includ e.g.:
1. when viewing a room that has a pack defined in the `m.image_pack.rooms` account data object, and
2. a bot which syncs emotes over multiple rooms.

This could be done by deduplicating by the mxc URI.

### Sending
#### Emoticons
For emoticons a client could add deliminators (e.g. `:`) around the image shortcode, meaning

> that if an image has a shortcode of `emote`, the user can enter `:emote:` to send it. If there are

Reviewer: A shortcode grammar has been added to the MSC text in [7d399e6](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2545/commits/7d399e6cf014afbe3156d77e6c3324dd207ef1b4).

We've opted to state that `:` MUST NOT be included in the shortcode. This still assumes that clients will still show `:` in the UI around shortcodes, but saves bandwidth by not forcing it to be included in the event every time.

> # MSC2545: Image Packs (Emoticons & Stickers)

Reviewer 29: Besides a room pack being shared with the whole room, further potential mechanisms for sharing image packs are not described (https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2545#discussion_r753881475), though image pack "stores" seem integral to sticker and "emoji" features of other platforms. Clearly it would be possible to create 3rd party platforms that serve as indices for sticker pack rooms, similar to how https://servers.joinmatrix.org and https://matrixrooms.info exist. Sharing images packs is slightly more complicated, because to reference one, you need to reference a room AND an event, which however is well possible using matrix.to and matrix: URIs. The current approach in practise seems to be using spaces as an index.

Client developers aiming to implement a rich e.g. sticker pack UX might come up with the idea to offer a "share" button in the client's image pack management settings that would generate a matrix.to link to a pack's origin room and state event. It comes with some potential problems for the receiver as they might have to join the room, wait for join, maybe not being able to join an invite-only room, being confused why there is a new room in their room list, etc. The sharing user's client might check for some of these requirements, such as invite-only rooms, and even offer to alleviate them (semi-)automatically, e.g. by sending an invite (on the other hand potentially causing more confusion).

Many clients implement "pills" as a GUI shard that indicates a certain functionality, i.e. linking to users/rooms/events. However recipients have no way of indicating more info, e.g. whether the linked event is a state event, let alone an image pack. Nice rich UI for sharing "links" to image packs therefore remains open at this time.

---

Another related thought is that as this feature becomes available, a lot of people unfamiliar with matrix moderation might start creating public rooms to author and distribute their packs. Introducing an image pack room type was discussed prior at https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2545#discussion_r910190308. Yet even without it, clients may wish to create UX specific for creating new pack-only-rooms with reasonable power level setups similar to what is currently used as announcement rooms to limit the abuse potential. It is a nice side-product feature of this MSC that discussion of image packs in otherwise pack-only-rooms is possible, but I think that is not usually available on other platforms.

Reviewer 21: Pack sharing does strike me as a fairly important consideration, and could be a whole new `### Sharing` section under `Proposal`. However that would be quite the addition, perhaps even just deserving of being a future MSC.
If such an addition to this proposal is not desired, I think this chain could be marked as resolved.
Otherwise ... would a PR to [soru/emotes](https://github.com/Sorunome/matrix-doc/tree/soru/emotes) be the way to go?

Reviewer: @zbee the original author, who controls https://github.com/Sorunome/matrix-doc, is no longer working on matrix. As members of the Spec Core Team, we have access to the `soru/emotes` branch, but not the entire upstream repository. As such, we won't be able to interact with/approve a PR made to https://github.com/Sorunome/matrix-doc. Suggestions are thus best made in PR comments here, and I can integrate those into the document in the branch.

re: this comment, I think [the above](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2545/files#r2020190557) will naturally be figured out by clients implementing the MSC and sticker index projects being built. I think it best to let these emerge naturally, then incorporate the lessons into either the spec or "client implementation guides" after the fact.

  "body": "a lazy cat lays on the floor",
  "usage": ["sticker"],
  "info": {
    // ... ImageInfo ...
  }
}
```

Taking all of this into account, a full image pack event may look like:

```json
{
  "images": {
    "myemote": {
      "url": "mxc://example.org/blah"
    },
    "mysticker": {
      "url": "mxc://example.org/sticker",
      "usage": ["sticker"]
    }
  },
  "pack": {
    "display_name": "Awesome Pack",
    "usage": ["emoticon"],
    "attribution": "drawn by @kayley:example.org"
  }
}
```

#### User and room image packs

The user SHOULD be presented with the images in their `m.image_pack` account
data event while interacting in all rooms.

A room itself can have an unlimited amount of image packs by specifying the
`m.image_pack` state event with different state keys. By default, the user
SHOULD be presented with these images only when interacting in the room that
the packs are defined in.

For a user to enable a room image pack to be presented in all rooms, the room ID
can be added to a `m.image_pack.rooms` account data event. Note that this is
separate from the `m.image_pack` account data event defined above.

> #### `m.image_pack.rooms` account data event

Reviewer 29: Hm, I think I have 2 arguments here:
1. We get via this MSC "room packs", i.e. the proposed UX is roughly that in a given regular chat room used primarily for chatting, the moderators can upload images to a pack which is stored in the same room, and then any member of the room will have their sticker/emoji picker suggest the images from that pack while viewing that specific room. I don't see why we would limit this such that in my Matrix Workation Thailand 2025 space, which will never canonically have `#blobhaj:the-apothecary.club` as a parent, I can't default that (my) community to be able to use the blobhaj pack. Wouldn't it be neat? Especially as the feature is basically already designed.
2. We already have the technical side modeled and included elsewhere (personal packs) and it would actually simplify this MSC to use it in both places

Again, not a blocker imo, maybe I am misjudging users/the use case.

> #### `m.image_pack.rooms` account data event

Reviewer 33: Sharing packs via links can feel like a detour, requiring users to venture out and manually add them to their accounts. In contrast, integrating room-specific packs directly into the interface makes them effortlessly accessible, fostering a sense of community and collaboration.

Links often represent solo creations, lacking the shared spirit of community-driven packs. By centralizing pack management within rooms or spaces, moderators can curate content without external tools, simplifying tasks and empowering communities to thrive.

Imagine a professional Matrix space with sleek emoji packs and a casual room bursting with fun emojis —each tailored to its unique vibe. This localized approach not only enhances usability but also personalizes the experience, making it more enjoyable and engaging for everyone involved.

> #### `m.image_pack.rooms` account data event

Reviewer: @HarHarLinks the use case example helped, thank you for providing that!

If I understand you correctly, you're suggesting adding a `m.image_pack.rooms` room state event with the equivalent definition as the same-named account data event (plus a `state_event` field)? And clients would then behave as if the room had an `m.image_pack` state event present with the referenced content?

That works, though recall that we don't have federated peeking, and users won't be in all referenced rooms. Thus, clients should add some UI to prompt the user to join the referenced room.

---

I think this would lead to de-duplication, which is a good thing. It also feels like a very natural thing to add to this MSC, with little controversy, rather than a follow-up. I've added this in d6e4e3902637e6c1d6db67929712cfee303f56a3.

The `m.image_pack.rooms` account data event consists of the following:

- `rooms` **Required, Map[String, Map[String, Object]]**. A map of room ID to
    another map: from `state_key` to an empty object.

This data structure allows specifying a single room image pack given the pack's

> room ID and `state_key`.

Reviewer: Should we combine the `m.image_pack` and `m.image_pack.rooms` account data events into a single account data event? Such that `m.image_pack` would have a `rooms` field with the contents of the existing `m.image_pack.rooms` account data event?

My initial assumption for why this was originally done was account data event size limits. But actually, I don't think individual account data events *have* event size limits? Instead, it would make more sense for a homeserver to limit the total amount of account data a user could store.

So, what purpose is there in having two separate account data event types defined?

Reviewer 33: I have question(s) about this:

1. Users can define global packs for their account to be used in rooms or users could specify set of emojis only to be used in specific rooms?

2. Would admin/moderator allow and upload what they think its best suiting for room if its community driven

3. Can we limit that specific rooms dont allow emojis or just allow emojis defined by room from question 2

Reviewer 29: > Looks like there is some precedence similar to the naming convention:
> 
>     * SSSS: `m.secret_storage.key.<key_id>`, `m.cross_signing.master`, `m.cross_signing.user_signing`
> 
>     * [MSC3890](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3890): `org.matrix.msc3890.local_notification_settings.<device_id>`

These look like different cases? Here in MSC2545 we propose to have both `m.image_pack` and `m.image_pack.rooms`. Does a `m.cross_signing` (not `m.cross_signing.*`!) event exist that my Ctrl+F is missing?

Besides that, yes I am sure this proposal was aiming to sort its events into a common namespace, which is more than reasonable.

Reviewer: > These look like different cases? Here in MSC2545 we propose to have both `m.image_pack` and `m.image_pack.rooms`. Does a `m.cross_signing` (not `m.cross_signing.*`!) event exist that my Ctrl+F is missing?

I suppose they are slightly different.

We could aim for `m.image_pack.user` instead of `m.image_pack` to be more consistent. It wouldn't break backwards-compatibility either as clients today are using `im.ponies.user_emotes`. I'm not too fussed either way though - curious what others think.

of writing, no limitations for `m.image` are currently defined (see [this spec
issue](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec/issues/453)).

Emotes and stickers may be animated, and clients may choose to pause animations
based on user preferences.

### Shortcode grammar

A shortcode's length MUST not exceed 100 bytes. This restriction MUST be
enforced by servers when sending reactions, but servers MUST NOT reject events
coming across federation due to having too many bytes in the shortcode field.
This avoids a split-brain in the room. Servers MAY opt to locally redact events
having too many bytes in the shortcode field.

The `:` character MUST NOT be included in the emote shortcode. The `:` character
has become synonymous with emotes - oftentimes typing the `:` character in a
message field will allow one to filter and choose and emote to send.

To avoid client fragmentation, with some clients opting to trim `:` when
displaying emote shortcodes and others leaving it in, the `:` character is
barred from the shortcode grammar. This is in attempt to standardise `:` as the
delimiter character for shortcodes.

Any other character is explicitly allowed. This allows shortcodes

> containing non-Latin characters for communities of those languages.

Reviewer: Should spaces be disallowed in shortcodes? I feel that if a shortcode has spaces in it, it may be tricky to filter for it in a client that pops up a search UI when typing `:`. Typically I would expect typing a space when searching to cancel the search.

Reviewer 33: I agree with you, shortcodes should not have spaces. It would bring more complexity to case. Disallowing spaces in shortcodes is a best practice that improves usability, technical reliability, and consistency. If you want to support multi-word shortcodes, consider using alternative separators like hyphens or underscores

Reviewer: Spaces have been disallowed in 2f14ae15.

### Sending

#### Custom emotes

Custom emotes are sent into rooms as `<img>` tags within the `formatted_body`
field of an
[`m.room.message`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.14/client-server-api/#mroommessage)
event. Many existing clients already render `<img>` tags in message bodies when
they render HTML, and its logical to reuse that functionality here.

To allow clients to distinguish custom emotes from other inline images, a new
attribute, `data-mx-emoticon`, is introduced to the `<img>` tag:

```html
<img data-mx-emoticon src="mxc://example.org/emote" alt="A cat holding a paper heart" title="cat_luvs_u" height="32" />
```

> A client should treat an `<img>` tag as a custom emote if the custom

Reviewer 29: I'm not sure what the issue (2.) with clients simply switching over to stable IDs would be, since as you say, there aren't compatibility concerns?

> What if you aren't in the referenced room?

I don't follow entirely. Then you still know what room to get the sticker pack from, and your client might even show you a join (public) or knock button, or a lock if it can determine that it is invite only.

But I agree this doesn't need to block this MSC, it would merely be nice to have.

> A client should treat an `<img>` tag as a custom emote if the custom

Reviewer: > I'm not sure what the issue (2.) with clients simply switching over to stable IDs would be, since as you say, there aren't compatibility concerns?

Sorry, by that I meant that I would prefer to keep the changes required to a client to declare support for MSC2545 as minimal as possible, if they've already implemented a previous version of MSC2545. This allows the ecosystem to more quickly adopt the new identifiers.

> I don't follow entirely. Then you still know what room to get the sticker pack from, and your client might even show you a join (public) or knock button, or a lock if it can determine that it is invite only.

I suppose I was saying that a client would need to add the extra logic to check for whether the room can be joined/knocked on, and designing UI around that. It would be a significant amount of extra work to implement MSC2545.

The behaviour you briefly described should go in the follow-up MSC though. It would be good to draft that up.

> A client should treat an `<img>` tag as a custom emote if the custom

Reviewer: Given I just added a new feature in https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2545/files#r2098450162, I should walk this back a bit:

> I would prefer to keep the changes required to a client to declare support for [MSC2545](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2545) as minimal as possible

This still feels like a larger change than that one was though, as we'd need to add a new query parameter to Matrix URIs (`image_pack`), which I feel could involve some back and forth.

I think what I really meant was that I'd like to *get this MSC over the line*, and thus I'm adverse to introducing new areas of potential bikeshedding.

`data-mx-emoticon` attribute is present. If this attribute has a value, that
value is ignored. Some libraries may automatically add an empty value, i.e.
`data-mx-emoticon=""`.

##### `src` attribute

The `src` attribute is required and MUST be a [Matrix Content (MXC)
URI](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.14/client-server-api/#matrix-content-mxc-uris).
Other URI schemes, such as `https`, `mailto` etc. are not allowed. Clients MUST

> NOT attempt to render images accessible through other URI schemes, as this may

Reviewer 29: I agree, and I'm fairly certain the spec does. It felt worth mentioning because it's fine that the MSC points out that the URI should be validated for being an mxc, yet if the client then goes and fetches and displays an unsanitised svg that is obviously bad.
Feel free to resolve this if there isn't anything to be added at this point.

lead to unintended network requests.

##### `alt` attribute

The `alt` attribute MUST be present. Its value SHOULD be the `body` of the emote, or if unavailable, its shortcode.

The `alt` attribute's meaning is inherited from the HTML specification:
<https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/images.html#alt>. It is primarily used
for accessibility purposes in describing an image for visually impaired users.

##### `title` attribute

The `title` attribute MUST be present. Its value SHOULD be the shortcode of the
emote.

The `title` attribute's meaning is inherited from the HTML specification:
<https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/dom.html#attr-title>. It is primarily
used for advisory information, such as tooltips. This could allow users viewing
a message to quickly find the shortcode of a given emote in order to send it in
their own messages.

##### `height` attribute

The `height` attribute MUST be present. This maintains backwards-compatibility

> with clients that do not support custom emotes.

Reviewer: `height` is not a required field in `<img>` tags [as defined by the HTML standard](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/embedded-content.html#the-img-element). Neither is it required by [the Matrix spec](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.14/client-server-api/#mroommessage-msgtypes).

So is it really required, or can we let it be omitted (and default to `32px`)?

Reviewer 33: Default it to 32px if not present. No need to enforce it

Reviewer 28: true the default to 32px seems sensible

Reviewer: Ah I see, it's for clients that don't support custom emojis. 32px sound good then.

I've updated the justification in bccfa910c7aa7ff33034a62b89421c93a75940bb.

etc.). Or they may choose to display messages containing only emoticons in a
larger font.

A `width` attribute is not required, in order to maintain the aspect ratio of
non-square emotes.

##### Client suggestions

A client could use the `:` delimiter to signify that the user wants to send an
emote. So, if the user enters `:emote:` in a message, the client could replace
that text with the corresponding emote based on the shortcode. Likewise, typing
`:` and then a character could initiate a search action through available
emotes.

If there are multiple emotes with the same shortcode available, the client could
for example slugify the containing pack's display name and prepend it to each
emote's shortcode with a separator character (i.e. `~`). For instance, the user
could enter `:my-pack~emote:` to select an image with shortcode `emote` in the
pack `my pack`.

#### Stickers

When sending a sticker, the `body` field of the `m.sticker` event SHOULD be set
to the `body` defined for that image, or if absent, its shortcode.

The `info` object of the `m.sticker` event SHOULD be set to the `info` object of
the image, or if absent, an empty object.

> ## Security Considerations

Reviewer 29: There are currently 3 levels of "sharing" image packs proposed:
- the user is entirely in control of the packs. This is when the pack is defined in profile data, or in a room they are the sole admin of.
- the user is trusting a community. This is when the pack is defined in a room or space by that community's admins, and the pack is within the rooms itself the discussion is happening in.
- the user is trusting the pack author. this is when a user enables global use of a pack by referencing it in their profile data. This is very similar to the above, but prone to a higher risk imo, assuming that it will often be some lone random pack author without further association to a community besides the users of that pack.

In any case the user is not in alone control over the pack, they are vulnerable to an attack where those who can update the pack can add or entirely replace the previous content with abusive content. If this were to happen, said user would be upon opening their sticker picker etc the next time be presented with thumbnails of abusive content. 

A possible way to address this, could be "pinning" pack versions, by referencing the event ID at the time of "subscribing" to the pack (this was mentioned in a previous review). It would then be prudent for the client UX to also offer some kind of update notice (or a way to navigate and switch versions in general? if state supports that?) to the user. Updating of course then presents the problem again.

I'm not sure, but I would expect due to the nature of state events, having ignored certain users is no solution for this either, as one would still receive their state updates by necessity of keeping the room intact.

Over all, the impact of this issue seems like it would not be too severe; most pack owners are known in their communities etc. This might however change as image packs become a "mainstream" matrix feature, especially if Element decides to adopt it for its widespread clients.

Reviewer 29: What about the ~~security~~ safety considerations around the topic?

Reviewer 21: Maybe the safety considerations warrant being called out, but I agree that it should be left to a future MSC - this isn't a feature or a consideration that other platforms have, and seems to be a pretty uncommon attack vector.

Reviewer: I've referenced this discussion under the "Security Considerations" section in 50512feeb7e3acab1622d39d8e835290ee0d6c74.

> ## Security Considerations

Reviewer 21: A new room type would certainly be a good approach to that, I think; but certainly agree that it'd be something for the future.
Given that, I think this chain could be resolved, especially since it is already noted under Future MSCs (and, to reiterate: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2545#discussion_r1008134381).

the image packs SHOULD be predictable between rooms.

A suggestion for clients of image pack ordering is as follows:

1. User image pack (defined in the user's account data)
2. Image pack rooms (defined in the `m.image_pack.rooms` user account data
    object)
3. Room image packs (defined in the currently open room's state)
4. Space image packs (defined in the hierarchy of canonical spaces for the
    current room)

Note: this MSC does not define an ordering for images within packs. That is left
to a future MSC.

### Image properties

Emoticons SHOULD be at least 128x128 pixels. This is to ensure that custom emotes look good, even on higher DPI displays.

Stickers SHOULD be at least 512x512 pixels, for the same reason.

Images filetypes are not limited by this proposal. Instead they are
equivalent to the formats allowed in an
[`m.image`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.11/client-server-api/#mimage) event. As
of writing, no limitations for `m.image` are currently defined (see [this spec
issue](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec/issues/453)).

Emotes and stickers may be animated, and clients may choose to pause animations
based on user preferences.

### Shortcode grammar

> A shortcode's length MUST not exceed 100 bytes. This is to prevent a

Reviewer 13: now that the grammar is limited to ascii, it's hardly important, but bytes are still kinda the wrong unit for measuring strings.

```suggestion
A shortcode's length MUST NOT exceed 100 characters. This is to prevent a
```

due to exceeding the event limit (e.g. emoji reactions).

A shortcode MUST match the following regular expression:
`[a-zA-Z0-9-_]+`. Note that this disallows zero-length shortcodes - not least
because searching for, and indexing, such shortcodes is complicated.

The `:` character is specifically not included, as it has become synonymous
across messaging platforms with searching for emotes - oftentimes typing the `:`
character in a message field will allow one to filter and choose an emote to
send.

Similarly, the `/` character is specifically not included. This character may be
used by clients to deliminate between shortcode and image pack when designing
auto-completion UI in the message field (i.e. `:some_emote/my_pack_name:`).

In addition, the space character is specifically not included. This helps avoid
common usability paper-cuts (multiple spaces between words, spaces at the
beginning/end of a shortcode). Shortcodes containing multiple words are
encouraged to use the alternative separators provided; a hyphen (`-`) or
an underscore (`_`).

The above character set does exclude characters from non-latin languages from

> being included (e.g. ブイチューバー). This is guard against various edge cases of

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
being included (e.g. ブイチューバー). This is to guard against various edge cases of
```

including all of Unicode (control characters, zalgo, future unicode updates,
etc.) leading to complicated implementations. It is assumed that users of other
languages are able to type latin characters when necessary.

A future MSC could add the concept of "aliases" to images - secondary names,
which would be any Unicode character, making searching for them with non-latin
characters easier. 

These restrictions MUST be enforced by servers on the Client-Server API, but MUST
NOT be enforced over the Federation API (i.e. when validating events received

> over federation). This avoids a split-brain in the room. Servers MAY opt to

Reviewer 13: I don't think that enforcing what is sent over the C-S API helps prevent split-brains?

A shortcode is NOT intended to be a visual description of an image, often to
aide the visually impaired. That is more suitable to the `body` field, defined
as part of an "Image object" below and on
[`m.sticker`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.14/client-server-api/#msticker) events.

### Image packs

Part of the joy of custom emotes (and stickers) is to be able to organise them
into packs and share these packs with others. This proposal defines a mechanism
for doing so.

#### `m.room.image_pack` state event

Image packs are defined by a new state event with type `m.room.image_pack`. The
`state_key` is simply a unique identifier for the pack itself. It is not
intended to be surfaced to users. This proposal does not associate any special
property with an empty string for an image pack's `state_key`.

`m.room.image_pack` state events contain the following keys within their `content`:

* `images`: **Required, Map[String, Object]**. A map from a shortcode ([grammar](#shortcode-grammar)) to an [Image Object](#image-object).
* `pack` **Optional, Object**. A [Pack Object](#pack-object).

```jsonc
{
  "type": "m.room.image_pack",
  "state_key": "Blobcats",
  "content": {

>     "images": {

Reviewer: The structure was determined long ago by the original author (in https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/2545/changes/96f28647ca72c22d5bd9851448634417882df768, before `short` was renamed to `images`.

Thus I don't know why it was originally chosen, but the separate is fairly clear. `images` is the image-level information, while `pack` is the metadata about the pack as a whole. I'll write this into the MSC.

>     "images": {

Reviewer: But as a client developer, do you have a justification for why it might be better to structure the object a different way?

>     "images": {

Reviewer 34: Fair enough, I don't really have any concrete reason why another structure would be better, it just seemed... a bit weird, which is probably not sufficient justification for changing things now it's got to this stage.

    description of the image.
- `info`: **Optional, ImageInfo**. The already specified
    [`ImageInfo`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.18/client-server-api/#msticker_imageinfo) 
    object (from `m.sticker`).

An example of an image object:

```jsonc
{
  "url": "mxc://element.io/1c8cac2c949b11649140b446d969d1934c59facf",
  "body": "a lazy cat lays on the floor",
  "info": {
    // ... ImageInfo ...
  }
}
```

Taking all of this into account, a full image pack event may look like:

```json
{
  "images": {
    "myemote": {
      "url": "mxc://example.org/blah"
    },
    "mysticker": {
      "url": "mxc://example.org/sticker"
    }
  },
  "pack": {
    "display_name": "Awesome Pack",
    "usage": ["emoticon"],
    "attribution": "drawn by @kayley:example.org"
  }
}
```

#### User and room image packs

A room itself can have an unlimited amount of image packs by specifying the
`m.room.image_pack` state event with different state keys. By default, the user
SHOULD be presented with these images only when interacting in the room that
the packs are defined in.

For a user to enable a room image pack to be presented in all rooms, the room ID

> can be added to a `m.image_pack.rooms` account data event.

Reviewer: Good catch, thanks! Fixed in 4c16abd5.

The `m.image_pack.rooms` account data event consists of the following:

- `rooms` **Required, Map[String, Map[String, Object]]**. A map of room ID to
    another map: from `state_key` to an empty object.

This data structure allows specifying a single room image pack given the pack's
room ID and `state_key`.

Clients should make the corresponding room image packs globally accessible in all
rooms.

While this MSC does not define any keys for the bottom-level object, defining it
as an object means greater flexibility in the case of future changes. For
instance, a future MSC could define only certain images to be sourced from a
pack, instead of the entire pack.

An example of a `m.image_pack.rooms` account data event:

```json
{
  "rooms": {
    "!someroom:example.org": {
      "": {},
      "de.sorunome.mx-puppet-bridge.discord": {}
    },
    "!someotherroom:example.org": {
      "": {}
    }
  }
}
```

An empty object under a room ID, for example:

```json
{
  "rooms": {
    "!someroom:example.org": {}
  }
}
```

translates to *all image packs that a room defines*, rather than *no image
packs*. This is intended as an optimisation to reduce event size versus

> listing the (potentially many) packs a room may have.

Reviewer: One use case I can think of are absolutely huge emote packs, like the popular "Ponymotes" which many people still use to this day. To give you an idea of the size: https://github.com/anoadragon453/friendica-ponymotes-addon/tree/master/ponymotes/emotes (~17,500 emotes). This pack isn't developed any more (afaik), but imagine if it was.

If I was porting this into Matrix, I'd probably break the pack up into category rooms (say 2000 emotes per category, with 4-5 image packs in each room, as the event size limit [restricts the size of an image pack to ~400 emotes](https://github.com/Sorunome/matrix-doc/blob/soru/emotes/proposals/2545-emotes.md#event-size-limits). This would produce about 9 Matrix rooms to cover all of the different categories.

If a user wants to use a particular category in other rooms, they could go into their setting, select all the packs in that room, and enable them globally. Ideally they'd have a "Select All" button to do so.

Yet if new emojis continue to be added, then eventually I, as the pack manager, would need to add another image pack to one of the category rooms. Without the ability for users to "subscribe" to all packs in a room, I'd have to `@room` everyone and make them go into their settings to add the additional pack each time. The subscribing mechanism eliminates that extra busywork.

---

UI-wise, I took a look at what Cinny does. It appears to not support subscribing to all packs in a room currently:

<img width="1631" height="1881" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/21dd53c7-8a92-4b4a-88b2-25b6fb214576" />

Neither does FluffyChat (which only allows enabling all or no packs in the room, and does so individually):

<img width="3164" height="1991" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/0488fac9-4bb7-4a6b-85c7-a41247b73675" />

---

If I were designing this, I would expect to see a list of packs for a room, a Select All button to make it easy to select/deselect all packs, and finally a toggle (Subscribe?) to mean "Subscribe to all and any future packs in this room". When toggled on, all pack-specific toggles would grey out to indicate that the room itself is subscribed to.

When the "Subscribe" button is hovered over, a tooltip stating "Any new room packs added to the room will immediately be available globally" could help get the point across.

---

So I think that this needs some design consideration on the client side. But I don't don't think it's worth blocking the MSC over. The functionality seems useful to keep in, and we can see how/whether it's used in practice.

> listing the (potentially many) packs a room may have.

Reviewer 34: Honestly the fact that two implementations of this MSC don't implement this feature feels fairly telling to me, and arguably means those don't really count as implementations of the MSC either. I'd rather split this out to a separate MSC so it can go through the, "will clients actually implement it" test on its own merit. The use case for very large image packs kinda feels like working around technical size limitations ought to be transparent to the user rather than them having to check a separate box and feels like we need to (dare I say it) choose a fundamentally different approach if supporting image packs this large is a requirement.

> listing the (potentially many) packs a room may have.

Reviewer: Given that no clients (that I'm aware of) have implemented it, I'm happy to punt it to a future MSC to get this one through, yeah.

Done in 1220db34

```json
{
  "display_name": "Awesome Pack",
  "avatar_url": "mxc://element.io/6130836e26b462a6fe63d4e080dd9d2037490f2b",
  "usage": ["emoticon"],
  "attribution": "From https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/Category:Blob_emoji and various Fediverse instances"
}
```

#### Image object

An image object consists of the following keys:

- `url`: **Required, String**. The MXC URL for this image.
- `body`: **Optional, String**. A textual representation or associated 
    description of the image.
- `info`: **Optional, ImageInfo**. The already specified
    [`ImageInfo`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.18/client-server-api/#msticker_imageinfo) 
    object (from `m.sticker`).

An example of an image object:

```jsonc
{
  "url": "mxc://element.io/1c8cac2c949b11649140b446d969d1934c59facf",
  "body": "a lazy cat lays on the floor",
  "info": {
    // ... ImageInfo ...
  }
}
```

Taking all of this into account, a full image pack event may look like:

```json
{
  "images": {
    "myemote": {
      "url": "mxc://example.org/blah"
    },
    "mysticker": {
      "url": "mxc://example.org/sticker"
    }
  },
  "pack": {
    "display_name": "Awesome Pack",
    "usage": ["emoticon"],

>     "attribution": "drawn by @kayley:example.org"

Reviewer 10: Personally I think it's worth exploring whether a [full-fledged `spdx` dictionary](https://spdx.github.io/spdx-spec/v3.0.1/serializations) would provide better structure and extensibility for attribution but that deserves a separate MSC, so I'm just leaving it as a note here.

1. User image pack (defined in the user's account data)
2. Image pack rooms (defined in the `m.image_pack.rooms` user account data
    object)
3. Space image packs (defined in the hierarchy of canonical spaces for the
    current room)
4. Room image packs (defined in the currently open room's state)
5. Referenced room image packs (defined in the `m.image_pack.rooms` room
    state event)

Note: this MSC does not define an ordering for images within packs. That is left
to a future MSC.

### Image properties

Emoticons SHOULD be at least 128x128 pixels. This is to ensure that custom emotes look good, even on higher DPI displays.

Stickers SHOULD be at least 512x512 pixels, for the same reason.

Images filetypes are not limited by this proposal. Instead they are
equivalent to the formats allowed in an
[`m.image`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.11/client-server-api/#mimage) event. As
of writing, no limitations for `m.image` are currently defined (see [this spec
issue](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec/issues/453)).

Emotes and stickers may be animated, and clients may choose to pause animations
based on user preferences.

### Shortcode grammar

> A shortcode's length MUST not exceed 100 bytes. This restriction MUST be

Reviewer: Good point! I've done some research to try and figure this out. To clarify, there's a difference between "valid UTF-8 byte sequences" and "valid Unicode scalar values".

Not every byte sequence can be decoded as valid UTF-8. Therefore, if we allowed *any* sequence of bytes (as the proposal currently does), text decoders may panic upon attempting to blindly decode them. For this reason, we absolutely should restrict the grammar to only "byte sequences that can be decoded as UTF-8".

Separately, the set of "valid Unicode scalar values" is a range that has been stabilised since 2003 ([RFC 3629](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3629)) and is unlikely to change. We _could_ restrict the grammar to this range to avoid causing any Unicode parsers to fail. This seems reasonable to me.

The Unicode consortium *assign* new codepoints every year in each Unicode update. It would be foolish to restrict to only the currently valid set of assigned codepoints, as that would break forwards-compatibility.

Given the above, the grammar rules could be:

1. The value must be a well-formed UTF-8 byte sequence;
2. After decoding, every code point must be a Unicode scalar (i.e. not a surrogate or noncharacter);
3. Length ≤ 100 bytes;
4. Must not contain `:` (`U+003A`) or ` ` (`U+0020`).

What do you think?

> A shortcode's length MUST not exceed 100 bytes. This restriction MUST be

Reviewer 35: Actually -- are we limited by what's allowed in an event/message already here? Otherwise you might have a mostly correct message with an invalid short-code?

enforced by servers when sending reactions, but servers MUST NOT reject events
coming across federation due to having too many bytes in the shortcode field.
This avoids a split-brain in the room. Servers MAY opt to locally redact events

> having too many bytes in the shortcode field.

Reviewer: I've noted explicitly that clients SHOULD enforce this grammar when managing packs in 06ca1859.

However there are two sides to this on the client side:

- Creating/modifying/viewing packs (addressed above)
- Viewing emotes/stickers in the timeline.

I'd like to suggest clients fail to render images in the latter case as well (to prevent images with invalid shortcodes becoming widespread). However, if we ever shrank the grammar in the future, such a restriction would cause clients to fail to render historical images. But I'm not not convinced such a change is realistic?

The `:` character MUST NOT be included in the emote shortcode. The `:` character
has become synonymous with emotes - oftentimes typing the `:` character in a
message field will allow one to filter and choose and emote to send.

To avoid client fragmentation, with some clients opting to trim `:` when
displaying emote shortcodes and others leaving it in, the `:` character is
barred from the shortcode grammar. This is in attempt to standardise `:` as the
delimiter character for shortcodes.

In addition, the space character is not allowed. This helps avoid common
usability paper-cuts (multiple spaces between words, spaces at the beginning/end
of a shortcode). Shortcodes containing multiple words are encouraged to use alterantive separators like hyphens or underscores.

> Specifically, the `U+0020` character (normal space) is disallowed. There are
> multiple other byte sequences associated with spaces in Unicode.

Reviewer 36: In context it is poorly worded. The above paragraph specifies the intention.

```
In addition, the space character is not allowed. This helps avoid common usability paper-cuts (multiple spaces between words, spaces at the beginning/end of a shortcode). Shortcodes containing multiple words are encouraged to use alterantive separators like hyphens or underscores.
```

This paragraph is below the intention, and is meant to clarify what exactly is not allowed. Considering the intent (arbitrary spacing between words). It might be good to avoid negation, which is typically bad for readability. Instead of saying what isn't allowed, say what is. This also addresses concerns regarding the null character all in one.

```suggestion
In addition, only non-separator graphic unicode characters are allowed. This helps avoid several problems:

1.  **Typos and Usability Issues:** Prevents problems caused by varying whitespace between words or at the beginning/end of a shortcode. Shortcodes containing multiple words are encouraged to use alternatives (hyphens, underscores, casing, etc.), to create a visual separation between words.

2.  **Null Character:** Disallows shortcodes that contain the null character (`U+0000`), which may be interpreted as a string terminator by many processors.

3.  **Control Characters & Security:** Disallows malicious shortcodes that contain control characters such as backspace (`U+0008`), delete (`U+007F`), or carriage return (`U+000D`). These characters serve no legitimate purpose in this context and may even be exploited to engineer security vulnerabilities.
```

Any other character is explicitly allowed. This allows shortcodes containing
non-Latin characters for communities of those languages, and ensures
forwards-compatibility with future Unicode updates.

### Sending

> #### Custom emotes

Reviewer 36: We should just reword the entire paragraph. It's not super clear what MUST and SHOULD mean in this context. Additionally, `alt` and `title` are not required in HTML. They are for providing accessibility or tooltips. We should prioritize rendering something over completeness.

```suggestion
#### Custom emotes

Custom emotes are sent into rooms as `<img>` tags within the `formatted_body`
field of an
[`m.room.message`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.14/client-server-api/#mroommessage)
event. Many existing clients already render `<img>` tags in message bodies when
they render HTML, and it's logical to reuse that functionality here.

To allow clients to distinguish custom emotes from other inline images, a new
attribute, `data-mx-emoticon`, is introduced to the `<img>` tag:

```html
<img data-mx-emoticon src="mxc://example.org/emote" alt="A cat holding a paper heart" title="cat_luvs_u" height="32" />
```
Emote tags are detailed below. Attributes are categorized by their requirement level:

- **Required**: The attribute MUST be present for the tag to be considered a valid custom emote. Clients MUST NOT render invalid custom emotes and MAY fall back to rendering a standard image or ignoring the tag.

- **Recommended**: The attribute SHOULD be present. Its absence does not invalidate the emote but may reduce usability or accessibility.

- **Optional**: The attribute MAY be present. Its absence does not affect validity or core functionality.

- `data-mx-emoticon`: **Required**. A client MUST treat an `<img>` tag as a custom emote ONLY IF the custom
`data-mx-emoticon` attribute is present; otherwise, the client SHOULD treat the tag as an ordinary image. Any values assigned to `data-mx-emoticon` are ignored and clients SHOULD make no assumptions about the existence or structure of any value assigned to the `data-mx-emoticon`.

- `src`: **Required*. The client MUST ignore any image tags without a valid `src` attribute. Clients MUST treat the `src` attribute as valid only if it is in  [Matrix Content (MXC)
URI](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.14/client-server-api/#matrix-content-mxc-uris).
Clients MUST treat other URI schemes, such as `https`, `mailto` etc. as invalid. Clients MUST NOT attempt to render images accessible through other URI schemes, as this may lead to unintended network requests. Clients MUST sanitize valid URIs before rendering.

- `title` *Recommended.* This attribute's meaning is inherited from the [HTML specification](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/dom.html#attr-title). It is primarily used for advisory information like tooltips. Its value SHOULD be the shortcode of the emote. If not present, a tooltip will not be shown.

- `height`: **Recommended.**. Clients SHOULD set height to "32px" . If the height attribute is missing, clients SHOULD assume a default height of 32px. This is a default intended to look good on most devices, and is for the benefit of legacy clients that do not treat custom emotes differently from other inline images. Clients implementing this MSC SHOULD ignore this value for rendering purposes. They are expected to override the height and render emotes based on their own UI requirements (e.g., the user's font size, displaying messages containing only emoticons in a larger font, etc.).

- `width`: **Optional**. This attribute is not required. Clients SHOULD maintain the aspect ratio of non-square emotes.

- `alt` **Recommended**. The `alt` attribute's meaning is inherited from the HTML specification:
<https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/images.html#alt>. It is primarily used
for accessibility purposes in describing an image for visually impaired users. Its value SHOULD be the `body` of the emote, or if unavailable, its shortcode. If the alt attribute is not present, clients SHOULD fall back to the title. If the title attribute is not present, clients SHOULD assign their own default alt text. 
```

most devices, and is for the benefit of legacy clients that do not treat custom
emotes differently from other inline images.

Clients implementing this MSC are expected to override the height when rendering
emotes, based on their particular environment (the user's font size, etc.). Or
they may choose to display messages containing only emoticons in a larger font.

A `width` attribute is not required, in order to maintain the aspect ratio of
non-square emotes.

##### Client suggestions

A client could use the `:` delimiter to signify that the user wants to send an
emote. So, if the user enters `:emote:` in a message, the client could replace
that text with the corresponding emote based on the shortcode. Likewise, typing
`:` and then a character could initiate a search action through available
emotes.

If there are multiple emotes with the same shortcode available, the client could
for example slugify the containing pack's display name and prepend it to each
emote's shortcode with a separator character (i.e. `~`). For instance, the user
could enter `:my-pack~emote:` to select an image with shortcode `emote` in the

> pack `my pack`.

Reviewer: Indeed, it will conflict, good point! And `:` is much easier to type.

It's important to note that this is purely a suggestion for clients to add a feature to auto-complete emotes when typing. It does not need to be a unique representation of the emote. For instance, two image packs could have the same exact name as well.

> pack `my pack`.

Reviewer 35: Does the user need to ever see the full short code? Does it make sense to use `:!roomid:.../shortcode:` so that it is easy to look up for clients?

> pack `my pack`.

Reviewer: @richvdh the spec angle concerns whether we should bar a specific character from the shortcode grammar for clients to use in order to implement such a feature.

I agree that we should stop arguing about the order of pack name vs. emote name here though. The only relevant discussion to this forum is which character to bar from the grammar. The current contenders are:

* `/`
* `_`
* `~`

> The current, organically evolved convention seems (?) to be `:neocat_floof:`, `:neofox_floof:`, etc. I.e. effectively `:` + $packname + `_` + $emote_name_snake_case + `:`.

This only works if `$packname` doesn't contain any `_`, which feels counter-intuitive if emote names are `snake_case`.

I still find `~` difficult to type.

I would be in favour of reserving both `/` and `@` (as anecdotally from my own experience, they are uncommon in emote names) and letting clients make use of them however they like. For this feature, it's *okay* if client A starts using `/` and client B starts using `@`.

> pack `my pack`.

Reviewer 21: I agree that `_` is probably not the best choice. Am personally more a fan of `@` or `~`, but really just anything other than `_`.
Thought I will say that an `@` feels like it makes more sense if the pack name came after the emote name.

emotes differently from other inline images.

Clients implementing this MSC are expected to override the height when rendering
emotes, based on their particular environment (the user's font size, etc.). Or
they may choose to display messages containing only emoticons in a larger font.

A `width` attribute is not required, in order to maintain the aspect ratio of
non-square emotes.

##### Client suggestions

A client could use the `:` delimiter to signify that the user wants to send an
emote. Typing `:` and then a character could initiate a search action through
available emotes.

If there are multiple emotes with the same shortcode available (from multiple
packs), the client could slugify the containing pack's display name and append
it to each emote's shortcode, using a `/` to separate shortcode and image pack
. For instance, the user could enter `:my_emo/my_pack_na:` to quickly surface an
image with shortcode `my_emote` in the pack `My Pack Name!`.

It's important to note that image pack names aren't globally unique either, so
even `:my-pack:emote:` could refer to multiple possible emotes. Thus, it is not
recommended to add a feature to clients to try and automatically translate

> `:shortcode:` or `:image-pack-name:shortcode:` in the message field to a

Reviewer: Whoops, that was from a previous draft of updating the separators paragraph from months ago. Nice catch!

A client may of course choose to name these however they like. In the spec's
history, it has had naming disparity with clients, i.e. "groups" vs
"communities". It is, however, imperative to name things in the spec accurately
after what they are.

#### Stickers

Stickers already exist in Matrix (see the [`m.sticker` event
type](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.14/client-server-api/#msticker)). They are
reusable images one can send; typically as a reaction to something sent in the
timeline. The value this MSC brings to stickers is creating a mechanism to
distribute them, such that a client can surface them to a user to choose and
send.

#### Shortcodes

A "shortcode" is a short, unique identifier for an emote or a sticker.

A shortcode is NOT intended to be a visual description of an image, often to
aide the visually impaired. That is more suitable to the `body` field, defined
as part of an "Image object" below and on
[`m.sticker`](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.14/client-server-api/#msticker) events.

### Image packs

Part of the joy of custom emotes (and stickers) is to be able to organise them
into packs and share these packs with others. This proposal defines a mechanism
for doing so.

> #### `m.image_pack` state event

Reviewer 37: At least Cinny, FluffyChat, Nheko, and Commet appear to be using it with the correct unstable identifier `im.ponies.room_emotes`, unless you are referring to something other than the state event.

> #### `m.image_pack` state event

Reviewer: Ah, sorry, this was put on the wrong title. I meant to put this under the `m.image_pack.rooms` header below. Let me recreate this thread.

    },
    "pack": { /* ... Pack Object ... */ }
  },
  // ...
}
```

#### `m.image_pack` account data event

A user may store a single, personal image pack within their account data using
the `m.image_pack` account data event.

The structure of this event is identical to the `m.image_pack` state event,
other than the lack of a `state_key` field.

`m.image_pack` account data events are exclusive to user account data. They
should not be placed or searched for in room account data.

#### Pack object

A pack object consists of the following keys:

- `display_name`: **Optional, String**. A display name for the pack.
    If unset, and the pack event is within a room, defaults to the room's name.
    Otherwise, the pack does not have a name.
    This does not have to be unique from other packs in a room.
- `avatar_url`: **Optional, String**. The MXC uri of an avatar/icon to display
    for the pack. If unset, and the pack is within a room, defaults to the
    room's avatar.
    Otherwise, the pack does not have an avatar.
- `usage`: **Optional, Array[String]**. An array of the usages for this pack.
    Possible usages are `emoticon` and `sticker`. If the usage is absent or

>     empty, all possible usage types are assumed.

Reviewer: We should make it clear that clients can still use image packs for any purpose they like, and that the `usage` field is really just a suggestion.

  "body": "a lazy cat lays on the floor",
  "usage": ["sticker"],
  "info": {
    // ... ImageInfo ...
  }
}
```

Taking all of this into account, a full image pack event may look like:

```json
{
  "images": {
    "myemote": {
      "url": "mxc://example.org/blah"
    },
    "mysticker": {
      "url": "mxc://example.org/sticker",
      "usage": ["sticker"]
    }
  },
  "pack": {
    "display_name": "Awesome Pack",
    "usage": ["emoticon"],
    "attribution": "drawn by @kayley:example.org"
  }
}
```

#### User and room image packs

The user SHOULD be presented with the images in their `m.image_pack` account
data event while interacting in all rooms.

A room itself can have an unlimited amount of image packs by specifying the
`m.image_pack` state event with different state keys. By default, the user
SHOULD be presented with these images only when interacting in the room that
the packs are defined in.

For a user to enable a room image pack to be presented in all rooms, the room ID
can be added to a `m.image_pack.rooms` account data event. Note that this is
separate from the `m.image_pack` account data event defined above.

> #### `m.image_pack.rooms` account data event

Reviewer: So: remove `m.image_pack` and keep `m.image_pack.rooms`.

> #### `m.image_pack.rooms` account data event

Reviewer: I've removed the `m.image_pack` account data entry in bad3ac8d806289d7ffd8e689f8e7ccc1a3b737bc.

> Another technical difference of account data is that it supports unlimited pack size. I think we can probably reasonably ignore this, there are some advantages to chunking packs into max size anyway?

It does support unlimited size, though I wouldn't be surprised if the spec tries to limit the size of account data in the future (to guard against DDoS).

You can get pretty far with a single pack in a state event (~400 images IIRC). Past that point, I think it socially makes a lot of sense to break it up into multiple packs.

displaying emote shortcodes and others leaving it in, the `:` character is
barred from the shortcode grammar. This is in attempt to standardise `:` as the
delimiter character for shortcodes.

Similarly, the `/` character MUST NOT be included in the emote shortcode. This
character may be used by clients to deliminate between shortcode and image pack
when designing auto-completion UI in the message field (i.e. `:some_emote/my_pack_slug:`)

In addition, the space character is not allowed. This helps avoid common
usability paper-cuts (multiple spaces between words, spaces at the beginning/end
of a shortcode). Shortcodes containing multiple words are encouraged to use alternative
separators like hyphens (`-`) or underscores (`_`).

Specifically, the `U+0020` character (normal space) is disallowed. There are
multiple other byte sequences associated with spaces in Unicode, but as this is
only intended to eliminate a common foot gun, more esoteric space characters are
not considered.

Any other character is explicitly allowed. This allows shortcodes containing
non-Latin characters for communities of those languages, and ensures

> forwards-compatibility with future Unicode updates.

Reviewer: New shortcode grammar has been added in c786d482963aadfc5f2b02b52411db85ef08ae24.

> # MSC2545: Emotes

Reviewer 11: This would need a comparison to https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1951 which aims to cover everything from distribution, pack building, rendering, and interaction with 3rd party pickers.

Author: as #1951 uses a separate state event for every single emote it doesn't seem to be very practical: Managing / editing isn't only more difficult for a client to achive, but you have significantly more metadata attached with every single emote. If you have many (on discord there are people who have many hundreds of emotes....) that is a lot of unneeded overhead.

But yes, adding some comparison section seems appropriate further down the road when this is more towards its finished state.

Author: Done, added a comparison block

Emotes.....emotes!

# Proposal
Emotes have at least a shortcode and an mxc uri. They are sent as `<img>` tags currently already in
the spec, as such existing clients *should* be able to render them (support for this is sadly poor,
even within riot flavours). Such an `<img>` tag of a shortcode `:emote:` and an mxc uri `mxc://example.org/emote`
could look as follows:

```html
<img src="mxc://example.org/emote" alt=":emote:" title=":emote:" height="32" />
```

Both the `alt` and the `title` attributes are specified as they serve different purposes: `alt` is
displayed if e.g. the emote does not load. `title` is displayed e.g. on mouse hover over the emote.
The height is just a height that looks good on most devices with the normal, default font size.
No width is displayed as to not weirdly squish non-square emotes.

## Emote sources
In order to be able to send emotes the client needs to have a list of shortcodes and their corresponding
mxc uris. For this there are two different emote sources:

### User emotes
User emotes are per-user emotes that are defined in the users respective account data. The type for that

> is `im.ponies.user_emotes`. The content is as following:

Author: Added `m.` suggested codes in parenthesis now

```json
{
  "short": {
    ":emote:": "mxc://example.org/blah",
    ":other-emote:": "mxc://example.org/other-blah"
  }
}
```

> The emotes are defined inside of a dict called `short`, meant as the "short and easy" representation

Author: The initial idea was to eventually add more keys for optional metadata or something. However, if you want to have many emotes, you quickly hit the 65k limit, so this is just about the smallest representation needed. The wrapping into `"short": {}` is just 11 characters and provides more flexibility. Dunno

of the emotes. Other, additional, keys may exist to define more metadata for the emotes. No such
guide exists yet.

### Room emotes
Room emotes are per-room emotes that every user of a specific room can use inside of that room. They

> are set with a state event of type `im.ponies-room_emotes` and a blank state key. The contents are

Reviewer 4: Is this a typo?

```suggestion
are set with a state event of type `im.ponies.room_emotes` and a blank state key. The contents are
```

Author: woops, typo, thanks

the same as for the user emotes.

## Sending
In places where fancy tab-complete with the emote itself is not possible it is suggested that sending
the shortcode will convert to the img tag, e.g. sending `Hey there :wave:` will convert to `Hey there <img-for-wave>`.

If there are collisions due to the same emote shortcode being present as both room emote and user emote
a user could specify the emote source by writing e.g. `:room~wave:` or `:user~wave:`. Other sources
could perhaps be added, see ideas section.

# Ideas

>  - Tag rooms as "these emotes can be used anywhere" inside of account data somehow

Reviewer: I don't think it would be too much extra content to include this in this MSC. It wouldn't be too bike-sheddy of a concept :)

Author: It is WIP as we discussed and soru didn't want to make an MSC at all but people wanted soru to make one so she used this as a dump field for the state of how things currently are (thus also the `im.ponies` prefixes) and also tossed in things she is interested in adding in here down the road

Reviewer 38: So you'd want someone else to flesh this out more?

Author: Soru didn't spend some time thinking about how to do this well yet. If others have ideas, they are happy to propose. Given enough time, soru will also write her own thing. She simply didn't give this enough thought yet, thus it is "just" in the ideas section.

Author: This is added now, would be great if someone could look over it

```

The emotes are defined inside of a dict called `short`, meant as the "short and easy" representation
of the emotes. Other, additional keys may exist to define more metadata for the emotes. No such
guide exists yet.

### Room emotes
Room emotes are per-room emotes that every user of a specific room can use inside of that room. They
are set with a state event of type `im.ponies.room_emotes` (`m.emotes`). The state key denotes a possible

> pack, whereas the default one would be a blank state key. E.g. a discord bridge could set as state key

Author: The difference is that that one has by default a `pack.short` of "room"

`de.sorunome.mx-puppet-bridge.discord` and have all the bridged emotes in said state event, keeping
bridged emotes from own, custom ones separate.

The content extends that of the user emotes: It uses the `short` key, which is a map of the shortcode
of the emote to its mxc uri. Additionally, an optional `pack` key can be set, which defines meta-information
on the pack. The following attributes are there:

 - `pack.displayname`: An easy displayname for the pack. Defaults to the room name, if it doesn't exist
 - `pack.avatar_url`: The mxc uri of an avatar/icon to display for the pack. Defaults to the room name,
   if it doesn't exist.

>  - `pack.short`: A short identifier of the pack. Defaults to the normalized state key, and if the state

Author: Any more appropriate name suggestion?

   key is blank it defaults to "room".
   
   Normalized means here, converting spaces to `-`, taking only alphanumerical characters, `-` and `_`,

>    and casting it all to lowercase.

Author: yeah, no empty string

As such, a content of a room emote pack could look as following:

```json
{
  "short": {
    ":emote:": "mxc://example.org/blah",

>     ":other-emote:": "mxc://example.org/other-blah"

Author: It is actually nowhere mentioned here that an emote has to start and end with `:`

>     ":other-emote:": "mxc://example.org/other-blah"

Reviewer 6: IMO these should include the shortcode only, and shouldn't concern itself with the input method.

>     ":other-emote:": "mxc://example.org/other-blah"

Author: That is exactly what soru is saying - these are only the shortcode. In the examples here they *happen* to start with `:`, but other clients may do other stuff.

>     ":other-emote:": "mxc://example.org/other-blah"

Author: Updated the MSC now so that the client should tackle deliminators on themself

  },
  "pack": {
    "displayname": "Emotes from Discord!",
    "avatar_url": "mxc://example.org/discord_guild",

>     "short": "some_discord_guild"

Author: Oh, here it is, good idea

  }
}
```

### Emote rooms
While room emotes are specific to a room and are only accessible within that room, emote rooms should
be accessible from everywhere. They do not differentiate themself from room emotes at all, instead you
set an event in your account data of type `im.ponies.emote_rooms` (`m.emotes.rooms`) which outlines
which room emote states should be globally accessible for that user. For that, a `room` key contains
a map of room id that contains a map of state key that contains an optional pack definition override.
As such, the contents of `im.ponies.emote_rooms` could look as follows:

```json
{
  "rooms": {
    "!someroom:example.org": {
      "": {},
      "de.sorunome.mx-puppet-bridge.discord": {
        "name": "Overriden name",

>         "short": "new_short_name"

Author: woops, name should have been displayname, the long name

      }
    },
    "!someotherroom:example.org": {
      "": {}
    }
  }
}
```

Here three emote packs are globally accessible to the user: Two defined in `!someroom:example.org`
(one with blank state key and one with state key `de.sorunome.mx-puppet-bridge.discord`) and one in
`!someotherroom:example.org`.

## Sending
In places where fancy tab-complete with the emote itself is not possible it is suggested that sending
the shortcode will convert to the img tag, e.g. sending `Hey there :wave:` will convert to `Hey there <img-for-wave>`.

If there are collisions due to the same emote shortcode being present as both room emote and user emote
a user could specify the emote source by writing e.g. `:room~wave:` or `:user~wave:`. Here the short

> pack name is used for room emotes, and "user" for user emotes.

Author: if it exists. If `im.ponies.room_emotes` with an empty state key just contains the `short` dict for the emotes, then it falls back to "room" as explained above.

}
```

#### Emoticon rooms
While room emotes are specific to a room and are only accessible within that room, emote rooms should
be accessible from everywhere. They do not differentiate themselves from room emotes at all, instead you
set an event in your account data of type `im.ponies.emote_rooms` (later: `m.emoticons.rooms`) which outlines
which room emote states should be globally accessible for that user. For that, a `room` key contains
a map of room ids that map to state keys that map to an optional pack definition override.

> The the contents of `im.ponies.emote_rooms` (later: `m.emoticons.rooms`) could look like the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The contents of `im.ponies.emote_rooms` (later: `m.emoticons.rooms`) could look like the following:
```

## Emote sending, using the mentioned events here
 - revolution
 - fluffychat

# Security Considerations
When sending an `<img>` tag in an end-to-end encrypted room, the client will make a request to fetch

> said image, in this case an emote. As there is no way to encrypt content behind `<img>` tags yet,

Author: Yeah, but that is well out of scope for this spec, as you'd also need to specify keys and thelike as attributes.

Additionally you'll want to keep an (encrypted) mapping of plaintext mxc to re-uploaded mxc so that emotes that are used often aren't constantly being re-uploaded, which would cause the server to clutter.

Soru thought it was appropriate to mention this issue here, even though it is nothing new. Related issue: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/issues/2418

The `info` object of the `m.sticker` event SHOULD be set to the `info` object of
the image, or if absent, an empty object.

### Room upgrades

Upon upgrading a room, homeservers SHOULD transfer `m.image_pack` state events

> to the new room. Homeservers SHOULD also update user's account data so that any

Reviewer 13: > I would expect the homeserver to upgrade a user's account data upon joining the new room, yes.

If you want this to happen, better make it explicit.

> to the new room. Homeservers SHOULD also update user's account data so that any

Reviewer 13: I think I'm slightly confused about what you are expecting to happen when.

The text of the MSC as currently written seems to imply that the only change needed to account data is during the actual upgrade process, but your comments here suggest that the server needs to walk the upgrade history every time someone joins a room.

I'm mostly asking you to spell out the operations a bit more explicitly.

> to the new room. Homeservers SHOULD also update user's account data so that any

Reviewer 16: IMO the whole section should be moved to a new MSC to avoid getting this one blocked on needs-implementation for another few years
